THE BREAD OF LIFE, OR Foode of the Regenerate. A Sermon preached at Botterwike in Holland, neere Boston, in Lincolnshire. By THOMAS GRANGER, Preacher of Gods word there. IOHN 6. 48. J am the Bread of Life. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in Yuie lane. 1616. TO THE VVORSHIPFVLL, and my very good friend, Master EDVVARD LEVENTHORPE, Sonne of Sr. IOHN LEVENTHORPE Knight: T. G. wisheth increase of all true happinesse. VVorshipfull Sir: THe remembrance of former times when I liued at Shingle-hall, the house of the good Knight Sir Iohn Leuenthorpe your Father, where aboue my desert, J found gratious acceptance, and entertainment, hath mooued mee, as in duety to your selfe I am also bound, to make speciall choise of you, to whom I might dedicate this little worke, but most pretious matter, The Bread of life, Earnestly beseeching the Lord that as you are a flourishing Oliue branch originally sprung from a noble roote, and truly honoured stocke, so it would please his goodnesse so to water you with the dewes and raines of spirituall graces, and with this liuely bread so to strengthen and increase you, as that you may accordingly bring forth fragrant &amp; pleasant fruits plentifully to God our heauenly father. Amen. Your worships to command in the Lord, THOMAS GRANGER. From Botterwike in Holland, neere Boston in Lincolnshire. 1615. THE BREAD OF Life. IOHN 6. 27. Labour not for the meat that perisheth, but for the meat that endureth to eternall life, which the Son of man shall giue vnto you: for him hath God the father sealed. IN these words two things are generally to bee considered: the Occasion, and the Scope. Concerning the Occasion. Our Sauiour Christ had done a cure vpon a man, that had been diseased eight and thirty yeeres; and that vpon the Saboth day. Heereupon the enuious Iewes tooke occasion to accuse him of the breach of the Saboth: but after some reasoning with them, he went ouer the sea of Galile, or lake of Genezaret, together with his Disciples. And seeing a multitude, to the number of fiue thousand, following him, he asked ▪ Philip( to proue him) where bread for such a multitude might be had. He answered, that two hundred penniworth would scarcely afford euery one a little. Then Andrew spake and told him of a Boy in the company that had fiue loaues and two fishes. These Iesus commanded to be brought, and hauing giuen thanks, he gaue them to the Disciples to giue to the people, and euery one being satisfied, there remained twelue baskets full of broken meat. The people seeing this miracle, said, of a truth this is the Prophet that should come into the world. Wherefore they consulted to make him King; but he withdrew himselfe into a mountaine alone, leauing his Disciples, who when euen was come, went ouer a corner of the lake, by ship, toward Capernaum. And when they had rowed about three miles or more, he appeared to them walking on the sea, and after that he ascended into the ship they were by and by at land. Now the people remained on the further side all the night, waiting for his comming from the mount: but seeing neither him, nor his Disciples, they also went to Capernaum the next day, being sure( as they supposed) that Iesus was behinde, vnlesse he passed by them inuisibly. And when they had found him there, they said vnto him flatteringly, Master, whence camest thou hither? By which words they intimate vnto him, that they had in admiration the manner of his comming thither; which they knew to be either by flying in the ayre, or by walking on the sea. This they said by insinuation, to sooth him, and to procure his good will, as though Christ respecting his owne worldly glory, by the fame of his miracles, should haue beene respectiue, and also beneficiall towards his welwillers and furtherers in that behalfe, and so consequently to them. But Christ not arriding this clawing insinuation, as sinfull men vse to doe, that are tickled with the itch of vaine-glory, in stead of a fauourable countenance, and pleasing answer, giueth them a sharpe reproofe, in the discouery of their hypocrisie, verse 26. Verily, verily, I say vnto you, yee seeke me not because of the miracle( that thereby you might haue been mooued to beleeue in me, and to hunger after the Gospell) but because( that by meanes of the miracle) you ate and were filled. But, labour not for meat that perisheth. Concerning the Scope. These words are the proposition or substance of the Sermon of Christ, in the words following to the end of the Chapter: And it hath two parts, viz. a Dehortation and an Exhortation. The dehortation is in the former words, Labour not, &amp;c. wherein three things are to be considered, the Order, the Matter, the Equity. Concerning the Order. It hath a sharpe reproofe before it, and a gentle exhortation after it. The one sheweth his hatred of their sinne; the other declareth his loue to their persons. First he correcteth their hypocrisie, because they sought him not for himselfe, but for some other thing than himselfe, as it is the nature and very essence of hypocrisie to make profession of following Christ, not for the loue of Christ, as Mary Magdalen followed him, but either for feare of losse, or hope of gaine, which the Gospell bringeth with it, or for some worldly aduantage, which may be occasioned by the Gospell, or wrought out of the profession thereof. Therefore in time of temptation and day of triall( as God doth sundry wayes proue the hearts of all men liuing) they vanish away as smoake, all their former profession being but as a blast of winde. Yea, for the most part such wicked hypocrites become vtter enemies of the Gospell, and professors thereof when time serueth, like to Iudas and Alexander the Copper-smith. Secondly, hauing shewed his hatred of their sinne, he seeketh redresse and amendment thereof; therein shewing his pastorall care, by dehorting them from that carnall course and practice of theirs, and also his loue to their persons, by exhorting them to be renued in mind, in heart, in conuersation, by faith in him, and obedience to his Gospell. This is the course, order, and method of Christ in teaching. Hen ce we learne what ought to be the practice of euery faithfull shepheard. First, to discouer sinne, and hypocrisie: the minde of man is full of darknes, that is, of the ignorance of God, of his will, and wayes. The heart of man is a world of euills, it is deceitfull aboue all things, who ▪ can know it? It is the fountaine and seede of all euill; yea, from this little handfull of corruption, proceede all the euills that are done vnder the Sunne, Mark. 7. 21. 22. The conscience of man is large and broad, hauing little feeling or remorse for sinne in it, and selfe-loue couereth all sinnes: Therefore the word of God is to be applied in particular, that therein, as in a glasse, not onely all men, but euery man in particular, may see his deformity, which otherwise cannot be detected, by reason of the blindnesse of our mindes, and hardnesse of our hearts. Heb. 4. 12. Secondly, in that after discouery or reproofe, he dehorteth them from the loue of this world, we learne by his example what we are to doe, after that we haue laid open the corruptions of the times in generall, and those particular sinnes which particular people are subiect vnto; namely, in brotherly loue to dehort them from sinne, and those especially which are then raigning and ruling, and to exhort them to the practice of the contrary vertue. And herein ought we chiefly to insist: For though the discouery of sinne be necessary to bring men to the knowledge of themselues, and their miserable estate, and dehortation bee likewise necessary to draw men into the dislike, and hatred of sinne, yet exhortation preuaileth most to their conuersion, and edification. The reasons hereof are these: First, sinfull men being too partiall and fauourable to themselues, are apt to deeme the worst of their Pastor discouering and reproouing sinne. And hereupon, either of themselues or by Satans suggestions, they presently frame an argument of resistance or personall segestion; This is spoken of malice, or of some false informations, or of secret euill will, &amp;c. therefore notwithstanding those great words, and neere searching of vs, we will not be perswaded to thinke the worse of our selues, or former courses. Secondly, there is in man a gain ▪ spurning spirit, whereby taking himselfe to be opposed, when he is reprooued, and dehorted, he presently, out of dislike falls a making secret contrary oppositions: so that much reproouing and dehorting, doth kindle and increase this corruption in him; and so in the end he is rather made worse than better. Those resistances proceed of pride, and selfe-loue: Againe, they that are humane, that is of ingenious and free disposition, are hereby prouoked to dislike and to anger. To this purpose the saying of Paul, Ephes. 6. 4. may fitly be applied, Fathers, prouoke not your children to anger, &amp;c. As if he should say, doe not daunt and discourage your children with too much seuerity, and rigour, least they being prouoked to wrath through your vniust austerity, fall to irreuerent murmuring, and to contemne your admonitions and threatnings, and to harden themselues against you. On the other side, exhortation presupposeth loue. Now whereas the hearers are perswaded of the Ministers loue to their persons, as also of his knowledge, and iudgement, they are by and by made welwilling, attentiue, and teachable. Againe, whereas we are better acquainted with vice, than with vertue, it being naturall, familiar, and easie with vs, exhortation doth not onely mooue vs to practice, but also teach vs what we ought to doe, bringing vs to the knowledge of our duties, and to the remembrance &amp; more serious thinking thereof. Reprehensions teach not, vnlesse obscurely, and by consequence; but they especially and plainly vnteach. Contrarily, exhortations as they doe plainly and chiefly teach vs what wee ought to doe, so doe they also as plainly teach what we should not doe. For as soone as we are taught the vertue, we can apparantly and of our selues discerne the contrary vice: but being reprehended for vice, we cannot so easily discerne the contrary vertue, because the one is naturall, and the other is of Grace, and gotten by industry. Thus much of Christs method, or order in teaching. The matter of the dehortation is Meat,( Labour not for meat,) the Greeke word is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, that is, worke not, take no paines for: And it signifieth also the worke of the soule, study not, care not, take no thought for, Mat. 6. 31. Meate, signifieth first bodily sustenance, that is, whatsoeuer we receiue into our bodies for the increase and reparation of the same, till the appointed time of our dissolution. Secondly, Meate signifieth personall maintenance, that is, all things outwardly belonging to the body, and person of a man, as apparell, buildings, riches, honours, pleasures, and all worldly ornaments and gracements. Thirdly, meat signifieth naturall wisedom, knowledge of arts, and morall honesty: All which things appeare so glorious in the eyes and imaginations of worldly men, that some in the ample possession thereof, haue thought themselues to be Gods, and many haue forgotten themselues to be but men: Notwithstanding all these doe putrifie and rot in the graue, there is no vertue or power in them to deliuer the body from the graue, or the soule from hell. These meats are declared by their adiunct or property( perishing:) The quality of this meate affordeth matter of contempt, and consequently of dehortation. First, bodily meat or sustenance is perishing in two respects: First, vnlesse corporall food be mortified it is no meate, therefore it cannot feed: But that it may be meat it must be altered from it owne nature and property, and be changed into the nature and substance of our bodies. The bodies of beasts, foules, and fishes( that they may be meate) must be mortified: I. By the shedding of their bloud, and other actions pertayning to that trade, separating the grosest impure from the pure. II. Their flesh must be further mortified by water, and fire, and other actions pertaining to that trade. III. Their flesh must be further mortified by mostication, or chewing in the mouth. IIII. They must be mortified by generall digestion in the common stomach, and from thence must they passe into innumerable parts of the body: All which doe mortifie the meat that is sent vnto them, separating the impure from the pure; conuerting the one into their owne substance and property, but expelling the other, as an vnprofitable excrement. So that mans body is the graue, and destruction of all things, though in another consideration it be the perfection of all things; for as much as it is the Centre of all things, and for the sustenance and maintenance whereof, the world, with the fulnesse thereof, was created. Secondly, bodily sustenance is mortall, and corruptible of it owne nature: without the body, therefore is the purenesse thereof mortall, in, and with the body. So that meat, with the body, and the body with meat, is perishing: For if meat without the body were immortall, then should it be so in the body, and mortality should be swallowed vp of immortality, the stronger transforming the weaker into his owne nature. In these two respects, and therefore in all respects, bodily sustenance is perishing. Secondly, personall maintenance is perishing ▪ Riches, honors, pleasures, the estate that is most firmly setled by strength, or policy, or both, are flitting and subiect to dissolution. Psal. 119. 96. I haue seene an end of all perfection, but thy commandement is exceeding large. In another place. The heauens shall waxe olde, as doth a garment, and as a vesture shalt thou change them. Nothing there is in this world, that lasteth alway, but the word of God. Innumerable examples hereof might be brought out of the Scriptures, and prophane authors, but euery mans owne knowledge and experience may teach him that these things are also perishing. Thirdly, naturall wisedome, deuices, and policies, are perishing and vaine. Psal. 146. 2. 3. O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any childe of man: for there is no helpe in them: for when the breath of man goeth forth, he shall goe againe to his earth, and then all his thoughts perish. In another place he saith, The Lord casteth out the deuices of Princes, and bringeth the counsels of the wicked to naught. Iob 5. 13. He taketh the wise in their craftinesse, and the counsell of the wicked is made foolish. Infinite examples hereof may be brought out of the Scriptures and prophane authors, but it were needlesse, seeing that euery day we may see with our eyes the fall of these things. Therefore seeing that this world, and the lusts thereof are vanishing, flitting and perishing, let vs not too much loue nor labour for the things thereof. Our Sauiour Christ dehorteth from caring and labouring for bodily meat, by two maine arguments. The one is drawne from Gods prouidence, Mat. 6. wherein he sheweth that God hath not care onely of great matters, as( some foolish Philosophers dreamed) but euen of the least things: For euery thing that hath breath and euery liuing thing, is fed of his bountifull hand, who like the good master of an houshold giueth meat, drinke, and all necessaries to euery seruant, and child in his house, in due measure and season. More than that, there is not a sparrow that falleth on the earth, without his knowledge; yea, the hayres of our heads are numbred. The second maine argument of dehortation is drawne( in this place) from the mortall and fraile nature of all things within vs and without vs. Now, if God in his prouidence doe supply vnto vs all needfull things by such meanes as he offereth to vs, and layeth before our eyes continually, which he hath commanded to vse, and none other, and that all farther cares are superfluous and vaine, not adding one iot or title to our estates; and if so be that those things when we already haue them, be corruptible and perishing, and therefore cannot free vs in the vse of them from corruption, let vs not vexe and disquiet our soules with care and thought, let vs not toyle and weary our bodies with labour and trauaile as the heathen doe, that know not God, nor yet know by what meanes the soule( though they confesse it to be immortall) is fed and sustained to eternall life. Thus much of the matter of the Dehortation. Concerning the equity thereof. It is not to be vnderstood that Christ here dehorteth vs from labour and trauell in a lawfull calling, seeing that God hath giuen euery man some gift for the same purpose, and hath prouided both meanes and place for the exercising of the same: But his meaning is that we should not so much carke, and care, labour and trauaile, for bodily sustenance, and maintenance, busying the faculties of the diuine and immortall soule, and spending the strength of the body about earthly and perishing things, as though God had made all things for vs, and vs for our bellies, and our bellies to liue for euer. Againe, he would haue vs hereby to know, that as all things are created for the sustenance and maintenance of mans body, so the body is made to be a vessell and receptacle of the soule, and the soule is made an immortall and spirituall vessell, or receptacle of the vertues, gifts, and graces of the holy ghost, which the soule is to shew forth by the bodily members, that so God may be glorified both in the soule and in the body, therein beholding his owne image, and likenesse with ioyfull complaeence, euen as the father reioyceth in the sonne; and that he may be glorified by the soule, and by the body, his power, his wisedome, his goodnesse, his mercy, shining therein before men. Mat. 5. 16. and Angells. Eph. 3. 10. For which cause he hath redeemed and sanctified vs, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royall Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that you should shew forth the vertues of him that hath called you out of darknesse into his maruellous light. Therefore wee must not set our mindes on earthly things, to satisfie the lusts and inordinate desires of the flesh therewith, like bruit beasts that haue none vnderstanding, but we must with godly care, diligence, labour, and patience, seeke and get our liuing by such good meanes, and in such a calling as God hath giuen vs power and ability to discharge, knowing and remembring alwayes this, that perishing meate is not the end of our labours, endeauours, and proiects, but serueth only for the building and maintaining of this Tabernacle of clay, wherewith the soule is clothed, and to which it is vnited. The gathering together of wood, stone, lime, yron, lead, &amp;c. and the building of our houses therewith, is not the chiefe end that we ayme at, but habitation, making the house to serue for our vses, and not our selues to serue it: euen so, meats of what kinde soeuer, are but the matter and ornaments of our naturall buildings, which is not the chiefe end, but the soules habitation or dwelling, which maketh her house, euen the body, to serue for her vse, and not her to serue the body. The body is nothing else but a shop furnisht with sundry instruments: the great World, that is, the Firmament, and the Elements, with all things therein contained, serue but to afford matter for the building, making, and maintaining of the shop with the tooles and furniture thereof. Now the soule is Gods Apprentice, Seruant, or workeman, doing the workes of God in the same, and with the instruments of the same. And the works of God are. First, that we beleeue in him. Ioh. 6. 29. that is, know and acknowledge him to be our master, and Lord, creating, redeeming, and sanctifying vs. Secondly, that in this shop and with these instruments, members and faculties, we doe his will, euen those things, not which we our selues haue a lust vnto, because we are not our owne. Rom. 14. 8 but his. 1 Cor 6. 19. but what he himselfe hath commanded. Rom. 6. 13. Giue not your members as instruments of vnrighteousnesse vnto sinne, but giue your selues vnto God, as they that are aliue from the dead, and giue your members as instruments of righteousnesse vnto God. 1 Cor. 6 13. The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. Though fornication in this place doth properly and specially signifie vnlawfull carnall copulation, yet it may and doth also signifie the alienation of mans heart from God the creator, Deut. 31. 16. and the setting of his affections on the creature. Colos. 3. 5. This he doth when he maketh his belly, that is, himselfe, his Idoll. Phil. 3. 19. Louing only himselfe, and all things for himselfe; seruing himselfe, euen of God, and of all his creatures, blessings and benefits; kissing his hand, Iob 31. 27. that is, magnifying and delighting himselfe in his owne conceit, for his owne wisedome, and prouidence. Ezech. 28. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. He that is thus alienated in his heart from the Lord, is a fornicator, diuorcing himselfe from the Lord, adulterating and polluting all the creatures and gifts of God. In which kind of vsage both he and they are accursed, euen as the Serpent was accursed, whom Satan abused to tempt our first parents to sinne, Gen. 3. 14. and as the brazen serpent was broken in peeces, being abused by the Israelites, 2 King. 18. 4. In which sence and for which cause they are called wicked Mammon. But the body is for the Lord. Euen for God and Christ, who in him, and by him, and through him, hath reconciled, begotten, and married vs his Church to himselfe, that being separated from our selues, &amp; from the world, Psal. 45. 10. 11. we should onely beleeue in him, onely hope in him, onely loue him, and all things for him; yea, that we should be so rauished with the loue of his presence as that we should neglect all worldly things, and euen forget to eate our bread. Hereby we are taught to bridle our inordinate desires, and to moderate our cares, &amp; labouring for worldly things, which are fraile, vncertaine, and corruptible: and to busie our selues, not so much in the getting of aboundance, with continuall vexation, disquietnesse, feares, and sorrowes, as to seeke continually to the Lord to sanctifie and establish our hearts with his good spirit, to grant vs patience, and contentation with that which commeth to vs from his hand, and to giue vs wisedome, and discretion to order our affaires, and so to dispose of the same, as may be most for his glory, the good of vs, and ours, and of others, especially the godly, the care of whose things pertaine to vs also. To this purpose let vs alway beare in minde the words of the Apostle. 1 Tim. 6. 8. When wee haue foode and raiment, let vs be therewith content. Vers. 9. For they that will be rich fall into temptations, and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drowne men in perdition and destruction. Vers. 10. For the desire of money is the root of all euill, which while some haue lusted after, they haue erred from the faith, and pierced themselues through with many sorrowes. Vers. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in vncertaine riches, but in the liuing God, which giueth vs abundantly all things to enioy. Vers. 18 that they doe good, and be rich in good works, &amp;c. Secondly, seeing that our bodies are but the vessels and houses of our soules, 2 Cor. 5. 1. And that all things serue onely for the sustentation and maintenance thereof; wee are heereby taught to make a separation of the spirituall soule from the earthly body, and to bee ioyned in spirit to the Lord, not liuing, to, and for the body, nor hauing any care to please and satisfie it in the lusts thereof; but liuing in, to, and for the Lord, subduing and beating downe the rebellious flesh, crucifying euery thought, imagination, and lust: bringing them into bondage and homage to the Lord, that the vertues and graces of his spirit may shine forth in our words, workes, and euen in our persons, as the light appeared out of darkenesse, and gaue shine vnto the world. 1 Cor. 9. 24. 25. 26. 27. Math. 5. 14. Phil. 2. 15. Prou. 4. 18. But alas, how short wee come of those duties, and how neerely, and deerely we are addicted, lincked and bound to the body, may easily appeare, if wee enter into vnpartiall iudgement with our selues, examining our daily practice, and the continuall course of our liues. And comparing our selues as wee are, with our selues as we should be, wee shall easily see that wee are flesh, and not spirit; that our soules are the drudges of our bodies, and our bodies the drudges of our meate ▪ seeing that for the large possessions, and plenty of outward things, many haue no regard to the body, to the safety, or health thereof. Eccles. 4. 8. In the practice of this multitude that followed Christ, wee may behold as in a glasse the nature and condition of all earthly men. For wee are all of one earth or clay, descended of earthly Adam, our mindes are full of darkenesse, our wills froward, our affections sensuall, there is none righteous, none vnderstandeth, none seeeketh after God. Rom. 3. 10. 11. All our labour &amp; trauel is to satisfie the flesh in the lusts thereof. And therein are our paines endlesse, and our desires boundlesse. But when wee come to take view of our inner man, the spirituall and regenerate part, wee can see nothing, our foules are dead, or sicke and feeble, for there is no spirituall hunger and thirst in vs, after the bread of life, the word of God, there is no appetite, desire, care, labouring for that; because the sensuall body hath brought the soule into captiuity, and subdued it to the flesh, that with the powers and faculties thereof it should serue the flesh. In the tillage, and sowing of our ground, what paines doe wee willingly take? How readily doe wee plow, and roote vp briers, thistles, and other weedes, least they ouer-grow and sucke vp the fatte of the earth, wherewith our corne should be fed? How patiently can wee endure the cold of Winter, the stormy blasts of the Spring, and the broyling heat of Summer in doing our necessary businesses? And when we haue done all; what haue we got, saue only a little perishing meat for our mortall bodyes? But contrarily, how little paines doe wee take in breaking vp the fallowes of our hearts, in rooting out the thornes and briars of sinne, which our nature doth as plentifully and willingly bring forth, as the earth doth weedes? Wee can well enough endure that the strength of soule and body, should be eaten vp, and deuoured of the canker-worme of sinne, which should bring and shew forth the fruits of the Spirit. A corrupt, and weedy soile wee are, and therefore wee are apt to receiue Satans tares, and to cherish the same in vs; but the word of life can make little or no impression in vs, our cold, waterish, and heartlesse foules can not nourish the seede of God to bring forth any fruit for his vse. In the time of haruest, with what ioy doe we reape the fruits of the earth? the very sight of our commodities so glads our hearts, that hunger, thirst, sweat, ache, want of sleepe, nothing troubles vs. We loue to be alwaies in the fields, redeeming the faire season with losse of our pleasures and ease, which otherwise wee know we should want afterward. But how carelesse are wee in reaping the spirituall foode of our soules? How little pleasure haue we therein? We thinke we stand in no neede thereof; therefore we goe dully and heauily to that field, where the same is to be gathered, as though wee came thither by compulsion of law, rather than of a willing minde. Many exeuses and causes of delay doe wee finde; long is it ere wee come, and when wee are come, wee haue forgotten to bring our haruest-tooles with vs, our mindes, hearts, affections, memories are at home, and on our worldly affaires; therefore wee thinke the time long, and vnlesse short worke be made, many will shorten the time with sleeping, and the rest of the day shall bee spent in vaine pleasures, foolish talking, vngodly iangling and ieasting, and doing many kindes of businesses which we conceiue wee may doe without any great danger of Lawe, being like to young children, which delight to play in Sand-heapes, dunghills, and miry puddles, but to be set to the Schoole of nurture and learning, t is as bitter as gall and wormewood vnto them. Againe, how doe wee carke and care, labour, and cast about, and euen breake our braines with study, and plotting how to compasse, and purchase Farmes, Houses, Lordships, Offices, and places of preferment? But how nought worth and vile doe wee esteeme this precious Pearle, the Kingdome of God? The kingdome of Heauen is not worth the caring for, it is not worth the labour, wee imagine that it may bee purchased with any trifle, with any supposed good thought, a word in the houre of death. How brutish and sottish are many great and wise worldlings, which seeing an earthly Lordship so long in purchasing, doe notwithstanding thinke to purchase the kingdome of God in a moment, yea, to haue it at commaund when they list: Beleeue well, and hope well from the teeth forward, is all that they will giue, and this can they giue at any time, without the least hinderance to their sinfull lusts in any thing. We will trauell by Sea and Land into farre countries, passing by dangerous gulfes, Rockes, Robbers, Pirates, Tempests, and amongst these will wee hazard goods, and life it selfe, for the increase of our goods, and when we haue gotten all we can, we can make nought but meat, drinke, and cloth of it, but whatsoeuer wee make thereof, it is but a perishing and corruptible toy, hauing matter of contempt, yea, of sorrow and griefe in it. For what troubles doe riches oft times bring to the owners thereof? Eccles. 5. 12. But as for those true and immortall riches, faine would wee haue them, but wee will not wet our foote for them, nor abide the cold ayre to breath on our faces, wee will not vndergoe the least displeasure of any man for them, nor sustaine the smallest losse of any thing, nor hazard the least thing that we haue. In trauelling into farre Countries, we are altogether vnsure to returne againe, yet shall not that hinder vs. If wee sustaine any great losse, we will once try againe, the later voyage may chance to saue it selfe, and recouer the other. But there is no such trauelling for these euerlasting treasures: And though wee bee sure with labour and diligence to finde and obtaine the same, yet will wee hardly stir to the doore, yea, though they bee brought, offered and euen inforced vpon vs, yet will wee not pull the hand out of the bosome, so drowzie, so lazie are we. If proclamation should bee made in time of dearth and famine, that such a Prince had sent a thousand quarters of Corne for the poore, and so many pounds of gold and siluer to be distributed among the poore indebted, and that hee would send shortly to euery port a vessell laden with wheat, and if it were but Beanes, what running, and flocking together would there be? what striuing? contending? complaining? laying open of our wants? of our debts? of our charge of children? what watching, and looking for that, which were to come? what running to the Sea-shore? climing vp of steeples? and cheering of our hearts in hunger, with hope of expected foode? In Esay 55. This proclamation is made with a loud, and high voyce; Hoe, Euery one that thirsteth, come to the waters, come, buy Wine, Milke, Hony, Bread, without money. In extremity of bodily want, wee would giue all that we haue for bread, and water: In our spirituall want we are called to come and take freely without money, or mony-worth, but who comes? who moues, or listens to the voyce of the crier? This spirituall foode is not worth the comming for, it is not worth the labour, though we may haue it freely. They that loue the hippes, hawes, rootes, and mast of this world cannot abide this heauenly foode, it is no more meate for them, then Pearles for Swine. The Onions, Garlickes, and Leekes of Egypt, euen the fruites of this, earth is the fittest for them, and sauoureth best to their tast: they are like young children that delight to lye groueling in the ashes, eating coales and clay, thus are they bereft of vnderstanding, like to Nabuchadnezar, Dan 4. the wilde Woods, Forrests, and company of beasts is fitter for them then the communion and fellowship of Saints. The ciuill flickering harlot, and stew-house doth best befit the Whoremonger, and adulterer: the Ale-house is fittest for the sottish Drunkard: the kitchin for the greedy glutton: the dunghill for the muddy Mamonist: a puft and windy blast of vaine-glory for the proud and rotten flesh of pride. This proclamation is also made, Prou. 8. 3. Wisedome crieth besides the gates before the city, at the entry of the doors; Ver. 2 ▪ Omen I call to you ▪ &amp;c. Ver. 6. Giue eare, for I will speake of excellent things. Ver. 18. Riches and honour are with me, euen durable riches, and righteousnes: my fruit is better than gold, euen then fine gold, and my reuenues than fine siluer: yet for all this, shee is not heard; for folly doth not comprehend wisedome, neither are incorruptible treasures receiued of corruptible and mortall bodyes. How eagerly doe many hunt after promotion, the windy titles of honour, and how glorious and wise are they, if they can creepe into fauour, and speciall respect with Princes? What a world of contentment, pleasure, and ioy is the aduancement of their houses vnto them? Hest. 5 11. 12. What hot pursuite, euen to the last gaspe, doe many make after earthly preferment; but to seeke to be in fauour with God, with Christ, with the Angells, to be honoured of God, to be heyres with Christ, to bee fellow seruants with the Angells, who almost much regardeth? Moreouer in our hot pursuits after the profits, and prerogatiues of this world, wee will goe on forward with a constant and steady course, and tread downe vnder foote euery thing that hindereth. Whatsoeuer the world thinke or say of vs wee care not, if wee may but accomplish our desires. If men count vs couetous, ehurlish, vaine-glorious, high-minded, wee regard not their speeches: If the poore curse vs, and brand vs with the markes of oppression, cruelty, and tyranny, yea, if wee haue but some great person to backe vs, we will care almost for no man: but how inconstant in a good profession are wee? How fearefull? How soone offended? How soone weary of well-doing? How faint-hearted? If the world frowne on vs, as it alwaies hath done on the children of God, wee are ready to giue ouer, to dissemble, and conceale our selues with Nicodemus, as though wee were ashamed of Christ, whereas wee should rather shew our selues to be ashamed of their wickednesse, and our owne spirituall cowardice. The Seruing-man will bee diligent and faithfull in his Maisters domesticall businesses, and outward imployments, hee will carefully obserue and note his Masters disposition and nature, what things delight and please him, what not. And if his master bee of a right generous disposition, that he vse to preferre good seruants, then will he serue him diligently many yeares; and the doubtfull hope of vncertaine preferment giueth life and courage to him, to vndergoe ioyfully and willingly any paines: heat, cold, wet, dry, night, day, are all alike to him; and hee is ready to hazard limme and life in his masters quarrell. But what is the haruest of his labours? Some preferment by his Master, or Masters procurement: yet is his Master but a man, and therefore vnconstant; he is but a man, therefore hee may leaue his former goodnesse; and because hee is but a man, the floure of grasse; hee may dye before the time, therefore saith Dauid, Psalm. 146. 2. 3. O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any childe of Man, &amp;c. But howsoeuer, Seruice is no heritage: but the Lords seruice is heritage, hee hath no sonnes, no daughters, no kinsfolkes, but his onely Sonne, which he gaue a ransome for vs, the price of our redemption, and adoption, that wee might be his Sonnes, and coheyre, with his owne Sonnes of the Kingdome of glory. Now, will the Seruingman doe this and that; nay, hee cares not what, vpon vncertaine hopes of trifles, and shall not we much more ioyfully and faithfully serue the Lord, enduring with patience the afflictions of this present time, seeing that wee haue a Master that is most good, most mercifull, most true, who hath promised plentifully to reward his Seruants, and is most willing, and most able to performe his promises. Why doth not the hope of this reward incourage and giue life vnto vs, faithfully to serue him, and ioyfully to suffer for him? It is because infidelity lurketh in the heart, it is because wee are not his Seruants, wee haue no delight in such kinde of seruice ▪ nor in seruing such a Master. And forasmuch as wee are carnall, wee will in such sort serue bodily Masters for the good of our bodies, but we will not serue the Lord for the both temporall, and euerlasting felicity of body and soule. Such like bruit beasts are sure that they haue bodies, and they daily feele that they require maintenance, therefore are they so labourious for the time present, and so prouident, and carefull for the time to come: but whether they haue soules they are not very sure, neither whether they be immortall, neither what shall become of them do they much regard. From whence then proceedeth this bodily niggardship, and spirituall prodigality and dissolutenes, that for a crust of bread they will sell the kingdome of heauen, but from Infidelity and Atheisme? Lastly, the poore man, that about ten, twelue, or twenty yeares hence, or hee knowes not how soone, shall haue a Lordship befall him, or some great liuing; can in the meane space farre more patiently indure pouertie, the hope of inioying the same before his death, doth reioyce his heatt in the greatest want, and though he be doubtfull whether he shall liue, and haue the benefit thereof, yet is it no small comfort to him, that his posterity shall be raised out of the dust. But we poore and miserable wretches, being sure that the inheritance promised is not farre off, death making a passage, and entrance to the same, are little or nothing comforted therewith, yea, though the time of life be almost expired, that one foote is euen in the graue already, though( I say) we be so neere to our inheritance, yet haue wee no reioycing therein; because wee are more in loue with this nasty and muddy cottage, than with the glorious pallace of heauen: distrust, infidelity, and the loue of this world, doth so deepely possesse our dead and darke hearts. Thus much of the dehortation ▪ But labour for the meat that endureth to eternall life, which the Sonne of man shall giue vnto you, for him hath God the Father sealed. These words contayne the Exhortation. The matter of the exhortation is( meate) which is declared, 1. By the effect or efficacie proceeding from the immortall nature thereof,[ which endureth to eternall life.] 2. By the Author or Giuer,[ which the Sonne of man shall giue vnto you.] This Authority and Office of the Sonne is confirmed, by the primarie or principall cause thereof, that is, the Assignement and Designement of the Father, according to the euerlasting decree of his counsell, in calling him,[ for him hath the Father sealed. But for meate.] Meate, in this place, is quite opposite and contrary to the former, signifying metaphorically in generall all things belonging to newnesse of life; in speciall the doctrine of the Gospell. For as the body is fed with meate, so the soule is fed by the word of God, through the efficacy and vertue of the spirit, which begetteth Faith in the soule, whereby the soule is quickened, for of it selfe it is dead: therefore seeing that faith is the life of the soule, that is well compared to meate which increaseth and preserueth faith, and that is the Gospell onely. 1 Pet ▪ 1. 23. Also the same Apostle saith, as Babes desire the syncere milke of the Word. It is a known principle in Philosophy, ex quibus nascitur aliquid, ex ijs pascitur: Whereof we are bred, thereof are we fed. Now our bodies are bred, or created, out of the great world, that is, the firmament, and the elements, therefore are we sustained, maintained, and preserued by the same, till the appointed time of our dissolution: euen so our soules are regenerate, and borne a new of the word, and the spirit, not to temporall, but to eternall life. Which endureth to eternall life.] These words are the effect of the Gospell. The Gospell is such meate, as it maketh the soule immortall, working in the soule, faith of the promises therein contained, and an assured hope of the performance thereof in due season. This meate being immortall, maketh the soule immortall, but the other is perishing, therefore it cannot free the body from corruption. And heerein appeares the difference of these meates. First, the vertue and strength of bodily food, wherewith it feedeth, is naturall, being infused into it in the creation, and continued till the end by generation, and production: But the vertue and strength of this meate, is the spirit of regeneration, descending from aboue, inlightning, and sanctifying whom hee will: And as meate without the naturall strength thereof, is but a dead corps, and cannot feede: so the Gospell without the spirit which is the life thereof, is a dead letter to him which receiueth the same, which killeth, but feedeth not; for then is it liuely in op●ration, when the receiuer thereof, that before was dead, is now raised from death by the spirit, which as it gaue life to the first Chaos, or Masse in the creation, so it giueth life to the second confused Masse, the naturall man. Secondly, bodily meate must bee mortified by the body, which separateth the impure from the pure, conuerting the one into his owne substance and nature, but expelling the other as excrements: but contrarily, the meate of the soule, which is the Gospell, is not mortified of the soule, but it doth mortifie the soule with all the powers and faculties thereof, conuerting the soule into the nature and property of it selfe. It destroyeth nature, it casteth a man out of himselfe, separating himselfe from himselfe, as a corrupt refuse, or excrement. As for example, Paul counted all things losse for the knowledge of Christ, and iudged them to bee but dung, that hee might win Christ, and bee found in him. But what things are they? His Iewish priuiledges, whereof he maketh an enumeration in the former verses, and diuers other things wherein hee excelled many of his owne nation: For hee was of excellent education, perfectly instructed in the lawes of the Fathers, skilfull in diuers languages, by profession a Pharisee, not luke-warme, but zealous, touching vertue, and righteous liuing, according to the Law, vnrebukeable. Heere is nothing wanting to Paul, as hee supposed, hee had made his saluation so sure, that if hee were not saued, hee thought none could be saued. But this proud and dead flesh that is without feeling, must bee launced, cut, and eaten away. For when as, in blinde zeale, riding toward Damascus hee was throwne beside his horse, being affrighted and astonished with the sudden light that shone about him, and the voyce that spake vnto him, hee was throwne beside himselfe also. Hee fell a Iew, he rose a Christian; his fall was his spirituall death to his former Iudaisme, the miraculous light and voyce of Christ his spirituall resurrection. From hence-forward he glorieth not in worldly prerogatiues, and Iewish priuiledges, hee counts them but losse for Christ, and iudges them to be but doung; but hee reioyceth and glorieth in afflictions for Christs sake, yea, hee is content to suffer any thing, scourgings, imprisonments, shipwracks, perils of waters, of robbers, of the Iewes, of the Gentiles, of false brethren; in the City, in the wildernesse, in the sea; to suffer wearinesse, painefulnesse, watching, hunger, thirst, colde, nakednesse, stonings, fire, sword, if so bee that by any meanes hee might attaine to the resurrection of the dead. Therefore this spirituall meate cures not, for wee are past cure, there being nothing in vs for medicine to worke vpon, to recouer vs withall. It mends not, for these mildring muddy walls of ours, can sustaine no new matter, no more then olde vessells can containe new wine, or an old garment retaine the new peece of cloth. It repayres not, for this ruinous building must not bee built vpon, but pulled downe, yea, the foundation thereof must bee razed. All mans vnderstanding, wisedome, reason, imaginations, will, affections, and all his goodnesse, must be cast vp, as vnprofitable rubbish, good for nothing, but as vnsauory salt, to bee cast into the streets for men to tread vpon, and a new foundation must be laide, whereon he must build a new, euen Iesus Christ, on whom hee must be founded, and out of whom he must grow, euen as the building doth artificially grow from, and out of the foundation. And all other things, what shew soeuer they haue of wisedome, godlinesse, zeale, deuotion, yet are they but sinne, because they arise not from the true foundation, which is Faith: Therefore this meate transformeth and renueth, non superinducens, sed inducens nouam formam, not putting vpon vs, but putting in vs a new forme or shape, which must transforme and change the whole man, and life of man ▪ out of naturall into spirituall, out of corruptible into incorruptible, out of earthly into heauenly, out of temporall into eternall. Thirdly, bodily meate is mortall, therefore it cannot preserue the body for euer, but both come to destruction: but the word of GOD is immortall, seeing that the spirit which is the life and strength thereof is immortall; so mortality is swallowed vp of immortality. And now Death where is thy sting? Sinne, where is thy strength? Despaire, where is thy worme? Hell, where is thy victory? This is the true Philosophers stone, that turneth iron euen iron hearts into gold, mortall into immortall, death into life, euen as Lazarus was raised from death to life, and as the dead and darke eyes of the blinde man were changed from darkenesse into light. Fourthly, corporall meate must bee mortified, and prepared by our labour and Art: but spirituall meate, which is the Gospell, is as gold, purified seauen times in the fire, seperated from all impurity, much more then gold can bee by the skill of the cunning Alchimist, mortifying and preparing vs, to conuert vs into the nature of it selfe. Wee serue our selues of bodily food, but this meate must serue it selfe of vs, else wee doe adulterate the same, applying it carnally to our condemnation, euen as the Iewes adulterated this miracle of our Sauiour, making no other vse thereof, than to serue their bodily turnes of it, the filling of their bellies. Note this well, for it is the nature and very essence of hypocrisie and carnall gospelling, which in these dayes is as rife as euer it was, and that in the highest degree. For in these dayes as there is much knowledge, so is there great abuse of knowledge by hypocrisie and sophistry. For men are not onely politicke to couer and hide their filthinesse by dissimulation, and apish imitation of certaine words and termes, and counterfaite shewes of profession, as they are subtile to defend and excuse their wicked and most vngodly doings, hauing Scripture and reasons as ready at command as Arrius the hereticke, and as the Deuill the Father of cauils and lyes. Satan neuer playd his part, his Deuills part so kindly, as when hee drew arguments of perswasion out of the Scriptures, thereby to induce Christ to sinne, contrary to the Scriptures. Neyther doe hypocrites play their parts so kindely, that is, imitate their Father the Deuill so naturally, as when they transforme themselues into the children of light euen as hee transformeth himselfe into an Angell of light, to deceiue. This hypocrisie hath taken such deepe rooting, and is become so habituall, that men are now as skilfull to deceiue their owne hearts, as heeretofore they haue bin to deceiue others. Let such sophisticall hypocrites take heede how they carnalize the Gospell, and profession of religion, that is, serue their owne turnes of it, eyther for profit or vaineglory, as the common practise is. And as men count themselues the wiser, as they deepelier dissemble, and blinde the world, so much more foolish are they, euen the Deuills fooles, not considering how that by this way, hee serueth himselfe of them. Now to conclude this point. Bodily foode, yea all worldly things that serue but eyther to feede and sustaine the body, or to glorifie the person of the outward man, doe no more but bring the body to the graue, or earth, from whence it was taken: but contrarily, spirituall foode, the word of God, doth feede and preserue the soule to eternall life, and bring it into the hands of God againe who made it, and infused it into the body. Secondly, this spirituall foode is declared by the Author and giuer thereof[ which the Sonne of man shall giue vnto you.] Hee calleth himselfe the Sonne of man, not purposely to signifie vnto them, that he is the Son of Adam, Abraham, Dauid, Mary, but heereby hee intimateth his godhead vnto them, recalling them from the view of his man-hood, to the consideration of his God-head, and of both in the one person of Christ. In Math. 9. 6. hee saith, The sonne of man hath power on earth to forgiue sinnes. Now to forgiue sinne is proper to God alone: Heere therefore he plainely confesseth himselfe to be God on earth. Againe, Iohn 3. 13. hee saith; No man ascendeth into heauen, but the sonne of man which is in heauen: here he manifestly sheweth that he is man in heauen. This amazeth the eyes, and astonisheth the vnderstanding of the world, how hee is God on earth, and man in heauen, at one and the same time. That he was man on earth, the world saw, yea with contemptuous, and scornfull eyes, looking onely on his outward appearance. Mat. 13. 35. And that God is in heauen it knoweth, but it neyther seeth nor knoweth, how the God head should be on the earth, and the man-hood in heauen, much lesse how they both should be vnited in the one person of Christ. This difficulty is thus manifested and declared. First, the body of Christ was formed of the sanctified substance of the Virgin, and without the knowledge of man, that his reasonable soule might come to an vndefiled vessell, instrument, or body, and that which Salomon speaketh of himselfe, Wisd. 8. 20. hyperbolically, is truly spoken of Christ; yea, rather being good, I came to vndefiled body. Secondly, the humane soule of Christ was sanctified and replenished with the gifts of the spirit aboue measure, to bee a fitting instrument for the God-head. And the God-head tooke the manhood vnto it, thus preparing, sanctifying and furnishing it. So that the God-head and man-hood, without confusion of the one with the other, doe make one person, without diuision of the one from the other. Now by vertue of this vnion, and communication of the two distinct natures, that is, of the God-head, and man-hood, with their properties and actions in one person, hee being man on earth, may be said to be in heauen, that is, in respect of the person to which the God-head is inseparably communicated, which is in heauen, and euery where. And this is Christ the son of God on earth, and Christ the Sonne of man in heauen; which I further illustrate by this similitude. First, the light was, before the starre of the Sunne was made: For three dayes and three nights were already passed, and the starres were made on the fourth day, Gen. 1. 14. So the God-head of Christ was before the manhood, which was incarnate in the yeare of the world. 3962. Secondly, the light assumed, and tooke this starre to it, which both make one Sunne, yet is the starre one thing, and the light another; but by indiuisible vnion of their substances they make one Sunne: euen so the God-head tooke the manhood vnto it, which both make one Christ, yet is the God-head one thing, and the man-hood another, but by vnion of both in one person, they make one Christ. Thirdly, the body of the Sunne is little, at least in our eyes, but the light is vnmeasurable, comprehending and filling both the Sunne, and all things, to the vtmost circle of the highest world: so the body of Christ is for quantity like to ours, but his God-head is infinite, comprehending, and filling both the man-hood and all things infinitely. Fourthly, though the body of the Sunne be in the firmament, yet wee may say, that the Sunne is heere or there, because the light thereof is in this or that place, yea the vitall power also, whereby euery thing doth liue and mooue, which is not separable from the Sunne, but beeing rooted in the same, is deriued and extended thence into all places; yet we say not, heere or there is the starre of the Sunne, not making the starre, but the Sunne to be in euery place: Euen so, though the man-hood of Christ bee now in heauen, yet is Christ in earth, and all places, as himselfe saith, Wheresoeuer two or three be gathered together in my name, there am I in the middest. Againe, Loe, I am with you till the end of the world. Not that the man-hood should be with them on earth, as them it was; which being ascended and glorified, must bee contained in heauen, till the day of iudgement, but that Christ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 should be with them. So that to conclude this point, Christ, God and man, in respect of his God-head, is euery where, and Christ, God and man, in respect of the man-hood, is in heauen, and no where else. Thus much of the author and giuer of this foode. Moreouer, this authority and office of the Sonne is confirmed by the principall cause thereof,[ for him hath the Father sealed.) God the Father decreed in his euerlasting counsell the office of mediation of the Sonne, and called him heereunto with an euerlasting calling, as hee is the Sonne of God, but from the wombe of his Mother as hee is man. This is the character, seale, and expresse image of God, wherewith the Father hath sealed him, euen all authority and power, with all infinite, celestiall, and spirituall gifts. Now this euerlasting calling, which is executed in, and by the man-hood, appeareth to the world by his doctrine and miracles, the authority, power, and maiesty of the God-head shining in his person, beeing the splendour and brightnesse of the glory of his Father. Seeing that Christ alone is the spence or storehouse of spirituall foode, wee learne whether wee are to repaire for bread in our spirituall hunger and thirst. Hee alone is the bread of God that came downe from heauen, and giueth life to the world. Other bread there is, but it is not liuing bread. This great world is Gods spence or storehouse, which affoordeth corporall bread, or rather matter of bread, which wee gather out of the same, and by our Art and industry worke it into immediate foode, which so soone as it commeth into the stomacke, is fet from thence into euery part of the body, for the nourishing and sustaining thereof: but this naturall bread is perishing. Againe, this world affordeth meate for the naturall soule: For it is Gods temple or building, and all the creatures therein contained, are his liuing vessels, or instruments, doing and working his will; And in them appeareth his owne omnipotency, maiestie, power, wisedome, goodnesse, iustice, mercy. Heere is matter for the reasonable soule to worke and feede vpon: but this is animall bread; enduring but to temporall life, not quickning, or reuiuing the soule to eternall life. Therefore there can no bread of life bee gathered out of this world, but the liuing bread must come downe from heauen, that must quicken and sustaine the soule to eternall life. It is liuing bread, not onely because it hath life in it selfe, but also because it giueth life vnto vs which are dead, which worldly bread cannot doe. For other bread must come to a liuing stomacke, as the matter to the workeman, but this liuing bread commeth to a dead stomacke, to giue not onely foode, but life also to the same, which it doth by the spirit which quickneth whom hee will. And hee that hath the spirit, hath life, from whence proceedeth spirituall hungar, and thirst, and consequently spirituall digestion of Christ, the liuing bread: but hee that hath not the spirit, hath not life, therefore though Christ be offered to him, yet is hee not quickned, nor fedde therewith, for the word of God is to him but a dead letter, euen as restoratiues, and nourishing meates are to a liuelesse corps. Therefore let vs not labour for bodily meate, pampering and fulfilling too much the brutish appetites of those corruptible carkasses, which are a burthen and wearisomnesse to the sanctified soule. Let vs rather labour to suppresse the intemperate and inordinate desires, and lusts thereof, least that obeying them in the lusts thereof, wee be transformed into the nature of euill beasts, or ciuill Epicures, as very many are in these latter euill dayes, wherein there are not so many conuerted from Popery to Protestancy, as doe reuolt from true Christianity to manifest Pharisaisme, to Ethnicall ciuility, Epicurisme and flat Atheisme, the Deuill catching more this way, then escape out of his hands the other way. Labour not for the preferments, promotions, pompes, and vaine flourishes of this transitory world, all which things are but momentary; and being persecuted with enuy, and accompanied with inseperable griefe and sorrow, affoord no true felicity, nor yet hearty reioycing to the possessours thereof. Let vs rather labour to curbe these high aspiring thoughts, moderating these flying and groundlesse imaginations with sobriety and sad wisedome. Labour not for worldly wisedome and knowledge: For the wisedome of God in his workes is vnsearchable, neither can the ground of his workes be found out. So that when wee haue done all, this is all that wee haue learned, namely, that wee now know nothing, whereas beeing vnlearned, wee thought we knew, or might know something, and haue onely gotten some discerning of our ignorance, and want of knowledge. Moreouer, whatsoeuer it is, it dyeth and perisheth together with the braine, not helping forward the soule one haire bredth towards the attainment of eternall blisse; for otherwise Satan might haue cause of hope, at least some mitigation of endlesse despaire. But let vs labour for the meate that indureth for euer, whereby our soules and bodies are preserued eternally. Let vs labour, that we may attaine to the knowledge of God, in the saluation of our soules, by faith in Christ: This is true wisedome. Let vs labour for the spirit of Regeneration, that wee may bee deliuered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sonnes of God: This is true liberty. Let vs labour for the assured hope of our eternall inheritance in the kingdome of heauen: This is an euerlasting and true kingdome. Let vs labour that wee may bee truely perswaded of the forgiuenes of our sinnes, and that we are in the fauour of God: This is true comfort, ioy, delight and pleasures. Let vs labour to know God to be our God, and protectour, which is our safety both from our temporall and spirituall enemies. Let vs labour to be partaker of all spirituall blessings from aboue, which proeeed from the Father of lights. Let vs labour for this meate, that is able to make our soules and bodies immortall; not like vnto Manna which our Fathers haue eaten, and are dead, but he that eateth this meate shall liue for euer. It is the precious balme that will preserue our soules and bodyes from corruption, that they shall neuer see death. Which meate, the Sonne of man, Iesus Christ hath giuen vnto vs, euen the Sonne of God incarnate and made man, hee is the spence and store-house, out of which wee must receiue this euerlasting foode: for all the treasures of the Father are hid in him, of whose fulnesse we shall receiue, and our soules shall bee satisfied with God. The Law affords no meat ▪ vnto vs; it is a destroyer, not a Sauiour; the Leauen of the Pharisees, euen Popery, which is a masse, and the head of all heresies and Satanicall policies is no meate, but poyson. And as for bodily meate, and drinke, which passeth by the mouth into the belly, it is of short continuance. Neither the Law, nor the prudent, nor the wise, nor the Scribe, nor the disputer of this world can affoord any part of this euerlasting food vnto vs. These are drye, barren, hungry, and fainty deserts. But Christ is the true Manna that came downe from heauen, which who so eateth shall not hunger any more. He is the rocke, out of which doe flow the waters of life, and hee that drinketh thereof shall neuer thirst any more. For thus hath God the Father decreed in his euerlasting counsell, and called him from all eternity, that through the assumption and mediation of the man-hood, hee should conuey this immortall meate, and spirituall treasures vnto vs. Therefore the bread of life can wee haue from none but from the Sonne; for the decree of the Father cannot be altered, neither can the calling of the sonne be in vaine. There is no wisedome, knowledge, saluation else-where to be found, saue onely in the Sonne: the truth of all which things may appeare outwardly vnto vs by his miracles, which no man could worke, but hee that was sent of God, who heereby testified of his Sonne, that by beleeuing in the Sonne, wee might haue life through him, not through our selues, nor any other. FINIS. Mark 7. 21. 22. Heb. 4. 12. Ephes. 6. 4. Psalm. 119. 96. Psalm. 146. 2. 3. Iob. 5. 13. Mat. 5. 16. Eph. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Rom. 6. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 13. 1. Tim. 6. 8. Esay 55. Prou. 8. 3. Hest. 5. 11. 12. Psalm. 146. 2. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 23. Math. 9. 6. Iohn 3. 13.THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD. A Sermon preached at Botterwike in Holland, neere Boston, in Lincolnshire. By THOMAS GRANGER, Preacher of Gods word there. IOHN 95. As long as I am in the World, I am the light of the World. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in Yuie lane. 1616. TO THE RIGHT VVorshipfull Mr. THOMAS LEVENTHORPE Esquire, Sonne and heyre to the renowned Knight, Sir IOHN LEVENTHORPE, T. G. wisheth all happinesse, and eternall blessednesse. RIGHT Worshipfull. The speciall affection that I beare to that louely Oliue, wherof you are a special branch, and the duty, wherein I euer remaine obliged vnto it, hauing heretofore receiued pleasant nutriture from thence, and delightfull refreshing in the shade thereof, haue often solicited me by one meanes or other, to shew and testifie my thankefull minde to the same, and to your selfe in particuler. Siluer and gold haue I none, nor any costly present, but such as I haue freely receiued, I freely offer vnto you. The water is a common element; yet when one Synaeta hauing nothing to offer to Artaxerxes passing by, he tooke water out of the riuer Cyrus, with both his hands, and offered it to the king, who accepted it as a speciall gift,( as Aelianus recordeth) first, because water is the best element. Secondly, because it was taken out of Cyrus. So the Ayre &amp; the Light are common, and I not hauing any gift to present you withall, am glad to offer the Light vnto you, which I hope shal finde special acceptance with you. First, because that of many lights this is the best light, giuing light to all other lights of the naturall soule, without which they are vtter darkenesse, euen as the lesser lights of the firmament are but darke and dead bodies without the light, and vitall influence of the Sun. Secondly, because this light ariseth, and shineth out of another world then is either the Macrocosme or Microcosme, to wit, the spirituall world, which is the word and Church of God: But though this light be common, because it is offered to all, and shineth vnto all, yet it is receiued of few, because darke earthy bodies cannot receiue the light: in which respect it becommeth a proper and speciall light, and I make no doubt, but that you are one of those few, who delight in this light: and therefore I trust will also accept this as a speciall gift, which is pretious and speciall in it selfe, though it be not specially, but vulgarly set forth by me, to whom the exhibiting, and shewing thereof to the world is also committed. The Lord protect and conduct you in the way euerlasting. From Botterwike in Holland, neere Boston, in Lincon. 1616. Your worships to command euer in the Lord THOMAS GRANGER. THE LIGHT OF THE VVORLD. IOHN 8. 12. Then spake IESVS againe to them, saying, I am the light of the world: he that followeth me, shall not walke in darknesse, but shall haue the light of life. THESE words containe a Sermon of our Sauiour Christ, preached to the Iewes in the Temple: Wherein two things are principally to be considered, the Preface and the principall Scope. The Preface is in the former words[ Then spake Iesus to them &amp;c.] Wherein consider these circumstances: First, The person speaking[ Iesus spake:] his speaking is amplified by a note of sedulitie and oftennesse in speaking[ Spake againe.] Secondly, The persons to whom he spake,[ to them] viz. the people of the Iewes, flocking together about him, not to the Pharisies. Thirdly, The time when,[ then] that is, either after this time when the Pharises had tempted him, vpon occasion of a woman taken in adulterie, or else in the great and last day of the feast of Tabernacles, as some thinke; but whether, it mattereth not much. Whereas it is said, that he spake to them againe, hence we obserue, and learne that Christ was most diligent, laborious, and painefull in his calling, being in all things answerable to the commandement and will of his father. He was often weary, hungry, thirstie with trauailing, and preaching; neither fainting, nor failing therein through want of earthly reward( as the maner of earthly men is) nor discouraged therefrom with the feare of his enemies In the Chapter aforegoing the Iewes seeking to kill him, he trauailed into Galilee, and from thence about the middle of the Feast to Ierusalem againe, where he taught continually in the Temple till the end of the last day of the Feast, then he went into the mount Oliuet to rest and refresh himselfe, and earely in the morning he came againe into the Temple to preach. By which History, and many other places, it is apparent, that Christ was continually employed in the actions of his calling. Hereupon it is that Iohn saith, Cap. 21. 25. If all things were written that Iesus spake, and did, I suppose the world could hardly containe the bookes, that should be written of him: which words he vttered out of the consideration, and reuiew of Christs great and daylie pains in teaching, preaching, &amp; working miracles, which he thought could not more fitly be expressed than by such an hyperbolicall kinde of speaking. Likewise, Ioh. 4 34. Christ was wearied with trauaile, and thirstie, hauing neither drunke, nor eaten any thing since the morning, it being now mid-day, therefore his Disciples prayed him to eate; but he answered, I haue meate to eate that yee know not of: My meate is, that I may doe the will of him that sent mee, and finish his worke. As if he had said, though meate be now necessarie for me, I hauing fasted thus long, yet is the doing of my fathers wil, and finishing of his worke more necessarie; therefore occasion of preaching, by the comming of the Samaritans, at this instant, being offered, I must forget bodily hunger, I must not now regard bodily meate, but I must redeeme the present occasion, with neglect of my body and bodily sustenance. Likewise, Math. 26. 55. I sate dayly teaching in the Temple among you, &amp;c. Hereby the Ministers of Christ, are taught by his example to be laborious and painfull in the faithfull discharge of their office, in the distruction of the kingdome of sinne and Satan, and in gathering and building vp the Church and kingdome of Christ, seeing that he hath sent them in like manner as his father sent him, as himselfe saith. In Ioh. 4. 35. Christ exhorteth his Disciples to performe the duties of faithfull labourers in the Lords haruest, to be carefull in reaping his fruits; his argument is drawn from the comparison of earthly haruest-labour. Say yee not, there are yet foure months, and then commeth the haruest? &amp;c. As if he should say, you are so carefull for this earthly haruest, that you count the moneths, the weekes, and dayes till haruest come, so hungarly doe you looke for it, and painefully labour in it; but the Lords haruest, for which you ought to be as careful, is euen now at hand, for yee may see the regions already white to the haruest, therefore you must not now be so carefull for bodily meate, as to labour in the Lords haruest, and to delight your soules in his worke doing, euen in reaping and gathering soules into his barne, redeeming all times and occasions with losse of your meate, drinke, rest, sleepe, pleasures, &amp;c. euen as earthly men do in the reaping and ining of their fruits. Furthermore he inforceth this exhortation by an argument drawne from the effect; namely, the reward of the haruest-labour, verse 36. He that reapeth receiueth wages, and gathereth fruit to eternall life. The wages is eternall life, and the beleeuing soules are eternall, Dan. 12. 3. They that turne many to righteousnesse, shall shine as the starres, for euer and euer. Ioh. 15. 16. I haue chosen you, and ordained you, that ye goe and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remaine, i. to eternall life. Hence it is, that Paul saith, 1 Thes. 2. 19. What is our hope, or ioy, or crowne of reioycing, are not you euen it, in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ at his comming? yes, you are our glory and ioy. The Lord inioyneth Ieremie this duty, with denunciation of vengeance annexed, if he fayled therein. Ier. 1. 17. Trusse vp thy loyns, &amp; arise and speake vnto them all that I command thee, be not afraid of their faces, least I destroy thee before them. The consideration hereof is a spur to Paul, exciting him to the serious performance of this dutie. 1 Cor. 9. 16. Necessitie is layd vpon me, and woe is vnto me, if I preach not the Gospell: And heereupon is it, that he so straightly chargeth Timothie, 2 Tim. 4. 1. 2. I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Iesus Christ, which shall iudge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and in his Kingdome: Preach the word, be instant, in season and out of season, &amp;c. These considerations of the reward on the one side, and of the punishment on the other, stirred vp the Apostles to preach the Gospell with all boldnesse and constancie. Act. 3. 14. 15. Act 4 13. 19. 20. Act. 5. 29. 30. Act ▪ 7. 51. 52. Yea, ioyfully to suffer afflictions, Act. 5 41. They reioyced that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ. 2 Cor. 11. 23. to 29. Secondly, this teacheth euery man to labour in his calling carefully and conscionably, approuing himselfe in all things to God, to a good conscience ▪ and to good men, Rom. 12. 6. 7. 8. Ephes. 4. 28. 2 Thess. 3. 10. Gen. 3. 19. Gen. 31. 6. Furthermore, whereas it is said that he spake to them, it is to be vnderstood of the multitude, though the Pharises in the next verse make replie. For Christ preached not to the Pharisees, but by accident, some of them euer being amongst the people that came to heare him, as spies, to watch him, and to catch some thing from his mouth, that they might haue whereof to accuse him, Luc. 11 54. Therefore, because they were but dogs, and swine, i. contemners, and persecuters of the Word, vtterly forsaken of God, and left to themselues, he casts not the holy things of God, the pearles of the Gospell, before them, Math. 7. 6. but in all places where he hath to deale with them, he either conuinceth them, or confuteth them, or reprooueth them, or curseth them, neither instructing, exhorting, nor dehorting them, which had beene in vaine, and to no purpose. Thus much of the Preface. Concerning the Scope, It is an exhortation, which is not simply propounded, but implyed in the reason thereof. The exhortation is[ follow me:] It is enforced by two reasons, the first negatiue,[ He that followeth mee shall not walke in darkenesse.] The second affirmatiue[ but shall haue the light of life:] These reasons are confirmed by their principle or ground,[ I am the Light of the World.] Of these foure things in order as they lie in the text. I. I am the Light of the World. It is an vsuall thing in the Scriptures to represent spirituall and heauenly things, by bodily and earthly things, that therein, as in glasses, we may behold heauenly things, although obscurely, which notwithstanding wee cannot otherwise perceiue, and see immediately, being too glorious, and vehement obiects for vs. Therfore as we cannot behold the light of the Sun in the Sun, but by reflexion thereof in the Moone, in the stars, in the water, or other bright body, or else by refraction thereof in the mistie ayre: so the soule, while it is in the body, heareth, seeth, vnderstandeth, imagineth, with the body, and in a bodily manner; and therefore is not capable of such hearing, seeing, vnderstanding, imagining, as it shal be when it is seperate from the body. Hence it is that Paul saith, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Wee now see through a glasse, darkely: We conceiue of Heauen by a Citie, whose walls, pauements and mansions are of gold, pearle, chrystal, emerald, &amp;c. Reu. 21 ▪ We conceiue of Hel by a darke dungeon, a stinging serpent, a gnawing worme, a burning riuer of brimstone, Esay 30. 33. So heere the wisedome, loue, mercy, and goodnesse of God in sauing his elect, reuealed by, and in Iesus Christ to the world, is cal ed Light. And because light and darkenesse are much vsed in the Scriptures, I will speake a little of this materiall, and bodily light; because it giueth light, and vnderstanding not onely to that, whatsoeuer may be spoken of in this text, but to many other places of Scripture. The Light is in substance cleane, pure, beautifull, subtile, simple, vniforme, voide of all mixture, free from outward pollution, and may more fitly be compared to the substance of the highest Heauen, which is the tabernacle, or Sanctum Sanctorum of God, and his Angels, than to any earthly thing. Such is the glory of the light, that the eye cannot behold it, being in a subiect of nature like it selfe, as the Sunne is. Againe, the light is pleasant, delightfull, cheerefull, comfortable, ioyfull, hopefull. For the light is the life of the world, and of euery liuing creature, and the absence of light is the destruction of euery creature. It is the life of the world in a double respect: first, in respect of the vitall vertue: secondly, in respect of the shining. 1. The vitall power of the light is dispersed throughout all nature, from the highest Heauen, to the center of the earth, comprehending, and contayning all things in it. And though it giueth not light to the eye in all things, yet it shineth inuisibly in euery thing ▪ whose vertue sustaineth, inuisibly, sence, motion, and life in all creatures, and without which the vertues, and operations of the starres aboue, and elements below, are fruitlesse, liuelesse and dead: so that Light being a materiall creature in it selfe, is the common life, and forme of euery creature. And this is the light that God created the first day. II. The light is the life of the World, in respect of the shining ▪ for if there were no light, all things should be hid in darkenesse, and inuisible, and therefore could nothing mooue without stumbling, and falling, neither know whether to goe, Ioh. 12. 35. And what could be looked for but sudaine death? Againe, without light we should haue no knowledge of any thing: the firmament, and elements, with all their creatures should be inuisible to vs, there should be nothing but blindnesse, ignorance, feare, horror, sorrow, despaire, we should be farre worse than the prisoner that lies in the bottome of a nastie dungeon: Yea, if the light of the Sunne were not, the World should be a very picture, and resemblance of Hell, a confusion of beasts, foules, and men, euery one treading other vnder foote, yea all things should be mingled together into one Chaos, or masse: there should be nothing but hunger, thirst, cold, nakednesse, feares, terrours, mourning, and wailing, continuall dying, one thing deuouring another. Consider therefore what is the necessitie, excellencie, glory and felicitie of the light, which is the life of the World. Hence it is that light is vsed in the Scripture to signifie good, and darkenesse euill. Light signifieth the glory of Heauen, the essence, and holinesse of God, the sonne of God, the doctrine of the Gospell, naturall vnderstanding, knowledge, and wisedome in the minde, the knowledge of the glory and wisedome of God in the saluation of the elect, holinesse of life, Christians, felicitie, and prosperitie, life. Contrarily, darkenesse signifieth Hell, the paines and of Hell, sinne and wickednesse, the blindnesse and ignorance of man since the fall, sinfull and lustfull liuing, the Gentiles that know not God, calamitie, and miserie, death. These things are generally signified by Light and Darkenesse. But for the clearing of this perticular place, the light hath foure speciall significations. First, It signifieth God, that is, the Trinitie in the Vnitie. Secondly, It signifieth the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, that is the Vnitie in the Trinitie. Thirdly, it signifieth the Doctrine of the Gospell. Fourthly, it signifieth Christians, and Christian life. Concerning the first signification; It is sayd, 1 Ioh. 1. 5. God is Light, and in him is no darkenesse. As if he should say, God is holy. This holinesse of the Diuine nature standeth: First, in the life, and incomprehensible essence, or being of God: Secondly, in his other essentiall properties, as his power, wisedome, iustice, mercy, goodnesses Thirdly, in his vnspeakeable, complete, celestiall ioy, blessednesse, and felicitie. And as God is all light, so there is no light without him, for all that is without him, is ignorance, darkenesse, and impuritie. Concerning the second signification. I. God the father is the light of the world, but this light in him is inuisible to the world, and to Angels, 1 Tim. 6. 16. Who onely hath immortalitie, and dwelleth in the Light, which none can attaine vnto. Ioh. 1. 18. No man hath seene God at any time. Wis. 9. 13. What man is he, that can know the Counsell of God; or who can thinke what the will of God is? Also, No man knoweth the father but the sonne, &amp;c. Therefore this light of the world in the person of the father is hid &amp; inuisible. II. God the Sonne is the light of the world, by communication from the father, and in him is the light, and life of the world manifest, and visible, which was hid in God from euerlasting. Ioh. 5. 36. As the father hath life in himselfe, so hath he giuen to the Sonne to haue life in himselfe. For this cause is he called the image of the inuisible God, and brightnesse of his glory, whose glorious nature, wisedome, and goodnesse shineth in the sonne, who with the father, is one and the same God. Heb. 1. 3. Hence it is, that he is called the wisdome of the father, because he perfectly knoweth all secrets hidden in the father. And he is in speciall manner called the Word, because he reuealeth these secrets, and this light to the World, in mans nature, and by mans voice. Ioh. 1. 18. No man hath seene God at any time: the sonne which is in the bosome of the father, he hath declared him. The Sonne therefore is the light, and life of men in a double respect. I. Christ is the light and life of man in the worke of creation: for by participation of his life, and light, he receiued life, motion, sence, and knowledge. Ioh. 1. 4. In it was life, and the life was the light of men. II. He is the life, and light of man in the worke of redemption: in which respect, here he calls himselfe the light of the World. The former naturall life, and light, which we receiued from him in the creation, is turned into darkenesse and death, through the enuy of the Deuill, and sinne. So that naturally we are without God, without light, without life, lying in the darkenesse of ignorance, and the pollution of sinne. Ezech. 16. 4. Rom. 1. 18. Now therefore, seeing that we are darknesse and not light, death and not life, euen dead in trespasses and sinnes. Ephes. 2. 1. God out of the hidden treasures of his wisedome, goodnesse, and mercy, hath quickned, reuiued, and begotten vs againe, by application of his liuely light, communicated from before the beginning of the world to the son, &amp; participated to vs by, &amp; through the son in the world. The son therefore is the light ▪ and life of the world: he is the wisedome and word of the father reuealing, declaring, and applying life and light to the world, and for this purpose the word was made flesh, and dwelt among vs, 1 Ioh. 1. 1. That which was from the beginning( euen Christ, God eternall) which we haue heard( euen the same Christ made man) which we haue seene with our eies, which we haue looked vpon, and our hands haue handled, of the word of life declare wee vnto you. The Sonne therefore in our life, light, and felicitie: he alone of God is made vnto vs, wisedome, righteousnesse, sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. This place is a plaine exposition of these words,[ I am the light of the World;] for heere the Apostle excludeth a man wholly from himselfe, as nothing but darkenesse and death, and setteth forth our spirituall, and liuely being, and manner of being in Christ. I. Hee is our wisedome: All sauing and true wisedome is in Christ, for God hath fully reueiled himselfe in Christ, and by him to vs, and by no other meanes, Colos. 2. 3. In him are hid all the treasures of Wisedome and knowledge, and if all be in him, then without him is nothing, II. He is made our righteousnesse, that is to say, by him, and in him, alone we are accepted and beloued of God ▪ For, first he alone by himselfe hath purged our sinnes: Secondly, his obedience alone is imputed to vs for righteousnesse. In which two things standeth the righteousnesse of faith, by which God is our God, and we are his people. III. He is our sanctification: By nature we are profane, without God in the world, a masse of filthinesse, and impuritie, Gen. 8. 21. Esay 64. 6. Iob. 14. 4. but by the spirit of Christ, wee are mortified, and renewed in affections ▪ will, &amp; euen in the spirits of our mindes ▪ Rom. 8. 10. Ephes. 4. 22. 23. 24. IIII. He is our redemption: As if he should say, by him alone wee are redeemed both from the bondage of sinne, and miserie that commeth by sinne. This redemption is begun in this life, being deliuered from the bondage of corruption, and accusation of an euill conscience, and perfected in the end of this life, when the soule is seperate from the burthen of the flesh; but consumate, and finished in the resurrection of the last day, when body and soule being revnited and ioyned together, shall remaine for euer with Christ in his kingdome of glory. Now, that which the Apostle saith there, that Christ is our wisedome, righteousnesse, sanctification and redemption, is all one with that, which Christ saith heere, I am the light of the world: Therefore if any man desire to know more wisdome, or other wisedome, more righteousnesse, or other righteousnesse, more redemption, or other, in whole, or in the least part, let him heare the Apostle, Colos. 2. 8 ▪ 9. Beware least there be any man, that spoile you through philosophies and vaine deceit through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: for in him dwelleth all the fulnesse of the god-head, bodily. III. The holy Ghost is the light of the world, Though God the Sonne be the wisedome and word of the father, giuing light and life to the spirituall world, that is, the companie of the regenerate, euen as the Sun giueth light and life to the materiall world: yet the world, that is the vnregenerate, liuing in the darkenesse of ignorance and sinne, doe not comprehend, nor receiue this light of life, no more then the dead eye, or body is beautified by the light of the Sun to see and liue therewith. Ioh. 1. 5. the light shineth in the darkenesse, and the darkenesse comprehended it not. 11. He came vnto his owne, and his owne receiued him not. Esay 53. 1. Who will beleeue our report, and to whom is the arme of the Lord reueiled? Ioh. 12. 37. Though he did many miracles before them, yet they beleeued not in him. So that the father is the fountaine of light, the Sonne is light begotten of the Light, and tooke flesh on him to manifest, and participate this light to vs, &amp; the holy Ghost is light proceeding from both, being sent of the Father and the Sonne to enlighten vs. But the Son is the light of the World in a more peculiar maner, because he is Emanuell, and in, and by him, is the worke of our redemption wrought, but yet with the cooperation of the father, and the holy Ghost, as if three men should weaue a coate, and the third weare it. So that the Trinitie in the Vnitie, and the Vnitie in the Trinitie, is the light of the World. Concerning the third signification. The Doctrine of the Gospell, is the light of the World. There be sundry Doctrines, and arts in the World, which are lights also; but they are naturall lights, not lights of life; there is no vertue in these lights to quicken the mortall body, or to reuiue the dead soule: the Doctrine of the Gospell is only the light of life. Ioh. 6. 63. The words that I speake to you, are spirit and life. Ioh. 17. 3. Psal. 119. 105. Ioh. 24. 13. Concerning the fourth signification: Christians, and Christian life are the light of the World, and especially the Ministers of the Word. 2 Cor. 4. 6. God that commanded the light to shine out of darkenesse, is hee which hath shined in our hearts, to giue the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Iesus. Math. 5. 14. Yee are the light of the World. Ephes. 5. 8. Yee were once darkenesse, but now are yee light in the Lord, that is, you are now enlightened by the word of truth, let your conuersation be according to the truth, Phil. 2. 15. Be blamelesse and pure, and the sonnes of God, without reproofe in the middest of a naughtie and crooked nation, among whom yee shine, as lights in the world ▪ Prou. 4. 18. The way of the righteous shineth as the light, more and more vnto the perfect day. Hereupon the workes of the regenerate, are called the workes of light. Rom. 13. 12. Put on the armour of light, i. honest behauiour. Notwithstanding all that hath beene said, we must know, that although Christ, the Gospell, and Christian life, be the light of the world, yet the world, namely the vnregenerate, comprehend not, nor see this light, because they take darkenesse to be light, and light to be darkenesse. Know therefore, that as Christ was reputed in the world, so were the Prophets before him, and the Apostles after him, and in such sort are the true Ministers, and true beleeuers esteemed in the world. Marke what Esay saith of Christ ▪ chap. 8. 18. I and the children which thou hast giuen me, are as signes and wonders in Israel, i. as monsters. As Dauid saith, Behold I am become a monster vnto many. And Iohn saith of him, Ioh. 1. 10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. Iohn 9. 29. Christ himselfe saith, Mat. 11. 19. The sonne of man is counted a glutton, a drinker of wine, a companion of Publicans and sinners. Mat. 27. 63. He is counted a deceiuer. Mat. 9. 34. A sorcerer. Ioh. 8. 48. A Samaritane, and to haue the diuell. Mark. 3. 21. His kinsfolkes lay hold on him, supposing him to be beside himselfe. Ioh. 9. 24, The Pharisies know him to be a sinner. If Christ was thus reputed of, who neuer sinned, and in whose person, words and works, the Maiesty, power, and glory of God appeared, yea through which, as through a chrystall, his diuinity shined forth to the world; how much more then the children of God that are clogged with infirmities? No maruell is it, though they be counted the vilest, and most contemptible persons of all other. See the cause hereof. Wisd. 2. 22, They doe not vnderstand the mysteries of God, nor can discerne the honour of the soules, that are faultlesse. The cause of this ignorance and going astray is, vers. 21. Their owne wickednesse hath blinded them. Ioh. 3. 19. This is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into the world, and men loued darknesse more then light, because their deeds were euill. The wicked hate the light because it discouers sinne, which they loue; againe the righteous loue the light, because it discouers sinne, which they hate, and manifesteth the right way vnto them, into which they desire to enter, and wherein they delight to walke. The world knew not the Prophets that were before Christ. But what part or people of the world? The Pharisies, Amorites, Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites? No maruell if these knew them not. But the Church of God, the Israelites knew them not: yea, they were worse then the Aliants. For the Niniuites persecuted not Ionas, but beleeued God. Ionas. 3 ▪ 4 5. &amp;c. But the Israelites persecuted al the Prophets with derision, contempt, imprisonment, death. Act. 7. 52. Which of the Prophets haue not your fathers persecuted, and they haue slaine them that shewed before of the comming of that iust, &amp;c. Which were the slaughter-houses of the Prophets, and Saints, before Christ? euen Samaria and Ierusalem, Mat. 23. 37. Euen Ierusalem, where was the Temple and worship of God, where aboue all places in the world, Gods name was called vpon. Ezec. 16. 46. Thy eldest sister is Samaria, thy younger sister is Sodome. Againe, the world, knew not the Apostles, that were after Christ. In Acts 5. 28. the preaching of the Gospell is counted sedition, and rebellion. In verse 38. 39. Gamaliel a Doctor of the Law doubteth whether it be of God, or of men, comparing the Apostles to Theudas and Iudas of Galile, that made insurrection in the dayes of tribute. In Acts 24. 5. Paul is counted a pestilent fellow, a moouer of sedition, a maintainer of the sect of the Nazarites, In the vers. 14. his doctrine is called Heresie, chap. 26. 44. Madnesse. 1. Cor. 4. 13. We are counted the of-scourings of al things. And Iohn the Baptist, that came in the way of righteousnesse, is said to haue the diuell. In the primitiue Church what euills soeuer happened to the City, or prouinces of Rome, whether famine, pestilence, earth-quakes, warres, vnseasonable weather, the Christians were thought to be the causes thereof: whereupon rose great persecutions; whereas indeed they themselues were the causes thereof, which by reason of their vnbeliefe, and malice, brought these iudgements of God vpon thei owne heads. And herein note the condition of this blinde world, it alwayes hath beene and is suspitious of the truth, and the true profession thereof, fearing and dreading the same, as an enemy to their peace, and safety. Worldly peace, rest, safety, liberty, prosperity is all that the carnall man seeketh for, or careth for, making the end of their owne doings and Gods doings also, the rest, ease, and pleasures of their bodies, and the pompous gloryfying of their persons. Whatsoeuer is aboue this, and for God, they take to be against them, because they are against God, though not in outward shew, yet in spirit, yea, making themselues their owne Idols, Ioh. 11. 48. If we let him alone, all men will beleeue in him, and the Romanes will come and take away both our place, and the Nation. These worldly Politicians, whose policy was not guided nor seasoned with grace, are afraid of Christ and Christian profession. If we let him thus alone, say they ▪ all men will beleeue him to be the Prophet and Messias that should come, and so make him King: which when Caesar heareth, he will come with an inuincible host against vs, and vtterly destroy this City, and the whole nation: Therefore our safest course is, by some meanes to plot his death: which plot and which meanes was the cause of the same destruction that they feared: for the Romane Emperour came, and tooke away their place and nation, because they slew the sonne of God, and persecuted the Gospell. These wicked wretches neuer feared that their infidelity, pride, couetousnes oppression, hypocrisie, should be the causes of their ruine, but they feared the Gospell, and godly life. Againe, Act 5. 24. The chiefe Priest &amp; Saduces had put the Apostles in prison, but an Angel deliuered them in the night, and commanded them to preach in the Temple the next day. Now the chiefe Priest and the Captaine of the Temple and the high Priests, hearing what was done, doubted of them whereunto this would grow. These carnall and gracelesse politicians regarding only the establishing of their place, and of themselues, and of all things for themselues, feared an alteration, &amp; doubted whether it would in the end proue to be with them or against them. And because indeed that it could not but be against them( for the preaching of Iesus to be the sonne of God, the Prince and Sauiour of the world must needs conuince them of rebellion and murther, to their vtter disgrace, shame, and confusion, among all the people) therefore they laboured by all meanes to murther the Apostles, &amp; to quench the light of the Gospell. In like sort very many in these times, hanging between Popery and protestancy, doubt, and haue long doubted what this geare will grow to in the end: In the meane time not regarding at all what their vnbeleefe, pride, oppression, couetousnesse, epicurisme, and mocking will grow to. Furthermore, as the world in all times and ages heretofore hath not knowne the straight paths of God; so in these present dayes of ours the true and right profession of Christianity is counted of many puritanisme, and precisenesse, phantasticalnesse, affectation of singularity, and hypocrisie. True it is indeed, that as there are true Preachers, and true beleeuers, so Satan stirs vp counterfeits, that haue an outward shew and resemblance of them, but are not purged from their inward filthinesse: These are they that worldlings stumble at, concluding thus, euen so are they all, therefore their profession is but a kind of sect; and to follow the common course, and practise of the world, is the surest and safest way. Here Satan hath his desire. Againe if any godly man that hath alwayes made conscience of his wayes, shall offend, though of meere infirmity, or occasioned by some strong temptation, but yet so as he may iustly be taxed, why then the matter is now out of all doubt; both he and all of his rancke are hypocrites, and none else: such is the blindnes of the world, and their praeiudicate opinion of the children of God. But now to conclude this first part, let me leaue this as a bone for the world to gnaw on, that stumbling blockes shall euer be cast before the feet of the wicked, yet shall the lanterne of Gods word shine vnto them, to guide them without stumbling or erring; notwithstanding stumble they will, and fall downe, euen to the breaking of their necke; for their owne wickednesse blindeth them, yea and they doe wilfully out of tbe hardnesse of their hearts close their eyes against the wayes of truth, because the waies of errour, death, &amp; destruction are more pleasant vnto them. Thus much of the principle or ground of the reasons enforcing the exhortation, which followeth next in order to be spoken of. II. He that followeth me. There are sundry sorts of followers. I. Yong gentlemen, that are trained vp for education sake vnder great personages, and for experience, countenance, and preferment sake in the world, are called their followers. II. They that hold on some sect of the Philosophers schooles, are called their followers. III. They that fashion and conforme themselues to the example of any man that excelleth in any faculty, are called his followers, but these are secular followers, and not pertinent to this place. When Christ the light and life of the world preached the Gospell of saluation to the world, in the outward forme and appearance of the Prophets that were before him, and of his Apostles and ministers after him, confirming his doctrine with miracles, he had diuers followers. I. Some followed him to be cured of their diseases, and infirmities, Mat. 15. 30. Great multitudes came, hauing with them the halt, blind, dumbe, maimed, &amp;c. Thus the ten leapers followed him, and especially the nine, that returned not to giue God praise. Luke 17. 17. II. Some ▪ followed him to gaze on him and his miracles, and for this purpose Herod was glad when Pilate had sent him to him, hauing been desirous of a long season to see him, because he had heard many things of him, &amp; trusted to see some signe done by him. Luk. 23. 8. III. Some followed him for their bellies sake, as many doe in these dayes. Thus Iudas followed him; not because he loued him, and embraced his doctrine in sincerity, but because he was a theefe, and had the bag, and bare that which was giuen. Iohn 12. 6. Thus the Scribe followed him. Mat. 8. 19. Master I will follow thee whither soeuer thou goest. He imagined in his earthly heart, as did Iudas and the people of the Iewes, that Christ should in the end be crowned King of the Iewes, and that he would prefer and aduance his followers, as earthly Princes vse to doe. Therefore Christ shapes him an answer accordingly, verse 20. The foxes haue holes and the birds of the heauen haue nests, but the Sonne of Man hath not where to rest his head; consequently he hath nothing at all wherewith to gratifie his followers and welwillers. Thus also a great multitude followed him ouer the sea of Tiberias, and from thence backe to Capernaum, Iohn 6. 26. Verily, verily, I say vnto you, you seeke me not because of the miracles, but because of the loaues that ye ate, and were filled. Fourthly, some followed him of enuy to entangle him, in his speechs, as did the Pharisies, Scribes, Sadduces, Lawyers, and the Herodians, which thought that Herod was the Christ. These are carnall and hypocriticall followers, which neither are meant of here in this place. The true following of Christ, which here he speaketh of, is expressed by diuers similitudes in the Scripture. Iohn 10. 21. My sheepe here my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, &amp;c. where hearing signifieth Faith, and following Obedience. In other countries the shepheards driue not their sheepe, but they call them and they follow them. Euery flocke knoweth the voice of their owne shepheard, by often hearing him, &amp; they follow him, but after a strange voice they will not follow: Euen so Christs sheep, the elect, heare his word, they know it and acknowledge it, and are obedient to it, that is, they suffer themselues to be ruled, and gouerned by their chiefe shepheard Iesus Christ, speaking to them and calling them to him in his word, yea clocking them together as the hen doth her chickens. Mat. 23. 31. But mark the cause why they heare &amp; obey him, in these words( And I know them.) This knowing is not onely vnderstood of Gods foreknowledge, whereby he knew who were his from before all times, but of his knowing of them effectually in time. I call it effectuall knowledge when the elect are possessed of this knowing or acknowledging them, by the inward calling of his spirit. And this assurance of Gods knowing them, acknowledging and owning them, is the cause why they know and acknowledge him, and are delighted with his word. Againe, this true following of Christ is farther expressed in Ephes. 5. 1. Therefore be ye followers of God, as deare children. This verse is a conclusion of an exhortation of the last end of the verse afore going, forgiue ye one another, euen as God for Christs sake hath forgiuen you: Therefore be ye followers, &amp;c. Children wee know doe imitate their parents, not onely in deeds and words, but euen in the affections of their hearts, and imaginations of their minds, resembling them inwardly, as they doe outwardly; so that a man may say, this is right the fathers child, or the father will neuer be dead whiles the child liueth. Now the reason hereof is, because he hath receiued the spirit of generation from the father, which frameth, fashioneth, and worketh him into the image, similitude, identity or selfenesse( as I may say) of his father: And this is a deare childe, because the father doth not onely loue his child, but himselfe also in the child; and the child not onely loueth his father, but himselfe in the father; so that the one cannot hate the other, vnlesse he hate himselfe; and neuer man hated his owne flesh ▪ Therfore this vnion is most firme, and perpetuall: euen so the children of God doe carry the resemblance and likenesse of God in the inner man, in holinesse by obedience to the first Table, and righteousnesse, by obedience to the second Table of the Commandments, which both proceed from Loue, and Loue from Faith. Therefore as God is holy, so are his children holy. Leu. 11. 44. I am the Lord your God, be sanctified and be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy. As God is righteous, so are they righteous. 1 Ioh. 3. 7. He that doth righteousnesse is righteous, euen as he is righteous. As God is mercifull euen so are they mercifull. Luke 6. 36. As God is loue, so walke they in loue. Ephes. 5. 2. Walke in loue, euen as Christ hath loued vs. 1 Ioh. 3. 14. We know we are translated from death to life, because we loue the brethren. As God is true and iust in all his words and works, so are they without hypocrisie, and doubting, both in respect of God their father, and in respect of their brethren. For the first, it is commanded Ios. 24. 14. Feare the Lord and serue him in vprightnesse and truth, 1 Sam. 12. 24. Feare the Lord and serue him in truth with all thy heart. For the second, it is commanded, Ephes. 4. 25. Cast away lying and speake euery one truth to his neighbour. The reason of the commandement is in the words following, drawne from the coniunction of our members( for we are one anothers members) but whose members are we? that the 15. verse declareth, of Christ our head, into whom we grow, and by whose spirit we are knit together. Therefore if we be the true members we follow Christ our head: Contrarily, if we be not true members, but false, counterfeit, and dead limmes, we are cut off from him, separate to the world, and bodily lusts: or at least if we be not apparantly separate from him, but doe still outwardly professe him, yet doe we draw no vertue from him, leauing no feeling thereof in vs, either mortifying sinne in vs, or quickning vs to newnesse of life; but are as the dead branches growing in the tree, but drawing no sucke or iuyce of life out of the tree. Secondly, if we be false and dead limbs, then are we separate from the other members, hauing no hearty fellowship with them. I need not to amplifie this following, whereby Gods children follow him, by any more specialls; for as they follow him in holinesse, righteousnesse, mercifulnesse, loue, truth, vprightnesse, so also in all other things. 1 Pet. 1. 15. As he which hath called you is holy, even so be ye holy in all manner of conuersation. Mat. 5. 48. Be you perfect as your father which is in heauen, is perfect, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royall Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should shew forth the vertues of him that hath called you out of darknesse into his maruellous light. To this purpose also Christ saith, Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good workes, and glorifie your Father which is in heauen. Yea, this is the end of your election, redemption, and calling, euen our sanctification. 1 Pet. 2. 2. Now the cause why the children of God doe so resemble him in true wisedome, righteousnesse, and holinesse, is because they haue receiued from him the spirit of regeneration. Ioh. 3. 4. Except a man be borne of water and the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdome of God; that is, neither into the kingdome of grace, nor into the kingdome of glory. He is called the spirit of adoption, Rom. 8. 15. You haue not receiued the spirit of bondage to feare againe, but the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, or call God father. Whatsoeuer we are, how morally good soeuer we be, we are but children of wrath, quite cut off from God, hauing no part at all in him; wild Oliues, Rom. 11. 24. Bastards and runnagates, as Cain and Cham, vntill God adopt vs into his family, giuing vs the spirit of sonnes, of his owne free mercy, and grace, Tit. 3. 5. 6 Ezech. 36. 26. 17. Because this politicall terme of adoption is vsed often in the Epistles, I will briefly declare the meaning thereof. Generation or begetting of children is naturall or legall: legall generation is a politicall act maintaining nature, ordained for their comfort, which haue no chidren, the law prouiding children for them, whom nature hath failed. And thus may a man be said to beget children legally. Legall generation is also twofold, Adrogation and adoption. Adrogation is when he that is a free man, and vnder no mans power, authority or command, viz. neither of father, or master, is receiued into the place of a sonne, by an other, which thus by law becommeth his father. And if he that is thus adrogate haue children, they are also vnder his power, as Nephewes, that is, his sons children. Adoption is when he that is vnder the power of an other, whether father or master, is taken by another man to be his sonne and heire. And if he haue sonnes that is thus adopted, they are the nephewes of the adoptour. And although the adoptour cannot giue the spirit of a sonne vnto him( which only the naturall father can do) yet is the adopted so obliged &amp; bound to him for those so great benefits both of freedome and inheritance, as that he cannot but for euer be most thankfull to him, yea alwayes ready and desirous to testifie the same by his loue, dutifulnesse, obedience, and all meanes towards his adoptour, euen as he were his owne sonne, and he his naturall father. To apply this. We, euen the best that euer was, were vnder the power of others, to wit, in the bondage, and vnder the tyranny of the diuell, and sinne, who had absolute power and command ouer vs: and we miserable wretches yeelded our selues willingly, yea with delight, into subiection, and homage vnto them, being destitute of the knowledge of God and godlines. Now God of his owne free loue, mercy, and grace, redeemed vs out of the thraldome of those tyrants with the bloodshed and death of his owne sonne: which willingly submitted himself in obedience to his father herein; for by no other price, nor other meanes could this purchase be made. Who because he was not only perfect man, but perfect God also, did by the spirit of sanctification free himselfe from the graue, the punishment, and imputation of our sinnes; and by the power of the same raised himselfe from death vnto life, corruption, and death hauing no power ouer him. This sanctifying spirit of the sonne hath the Father giuen vs, that by the power thereof our bond-mens minds, wills, affections, might be mortified and crucified; and that sonne-like and spirituall minds, wills, affections, might be put into vs, daily renuing vs into the nature of ingenuous, and freeborne sonnes. This is more then the legall father or adoptour can doe. For he can doe no more but binde his adopted sonne to thankfulnesse for his benefits of bodily freedome, and earthly inheritance; but God hath giuen vs the spirit of his sonne, whereby we are made and transformed into naturall sonnes, and therefore affectioned towards him, as the child is towards his naturall fathel. Much more thankfull therefore, louing, dutifull and obedient ought we to be( if we be true sonnes) to God our father, and Christ our redeemer, that hath so dearely bought vs out of the power of sinne, death, and damnation, and brought vs into the glorious liberty of sonnes, and hope of euerlasting inheritance together with his owne sonne. Therefore it is apparant, that it is the spirit which quickneth, begetteth, fashioneth, and conformeth the children of God into the similitude and likenes of God their father, wherein at the first they were created, and into which they are renewed by the holy Ghost, by the Gospell of faith. This begetting and quickning spirit is called immortall seede. 1. Pet. 1. 23. Being borne a new, not of mortall seede, but of immortall, by the word of God, &amp;c. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoeuer is borne of God sinneth not, because his seede remaineth in him, &amp;c. This seede is not the essence of the holy Ghost, but the power thereof, begetting faith of the Gospell in vs, crucifying the body of sinne in vs, and renuing vs into the image of God. Rom. 1. 13. 14. If ye mortifie the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, ye shall liue; for as many as are led by the spirit of God, are the sonnes of God. Tit. 3 4. We are saued by the washing of the new birth, and renuing of the holy Ghost. To conclude this point then: As the child doth imitate the father by the vnion and identity of the spirit communicated vnto him from the father: euen so the child of God doth imitate and follow Christ by the vnion of the spirit of God and Christ, which the Apostle calls participation of the diuine nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Wherby most great and pretious promises are giuen vnto vs, that by them ye should be partakers of the godly nature, in that ye flee the corruption which is in the world through lust. Quest Hereupon it may be demanded, how we are partakers of the godly nature, and how we are said properly to be the children of God. Answ. We are partakers of the godly nature two wayes. First, in respect of the effect, vertues, and gifts of the holy Ghost working in vs, and by vs; as, first, enlightning our minds with the true knowledge of Christ: secondly, begetting faith in vs, and incorporating vs into Christ: thirdly, purging out the leauen of naturall corruption in vs: fourthly, fashioning vs into new obedience: fiftly, applying Christ with his gifts, and treasures vnto vs: sixtly, leading vs into all truth: seuenthly, comforting vs in afflictions: eightly, sealing the certainty of our inheritance in our hearts by his testimony, as a pledge or earnest of the promises of God. Ephes. 1. 14. Hence it is that he is called The spirit of wisedome, and vnderstanding, the spirit of counsell, and strength, the spirit of knowledge, and feare of the Lord, Esay. 11. 2. Because hee begetteth, worketh, and increaseth those vertues and graces in vs. Likewise the spirit of meeknesse, Galat. 6. 1. The spirit of faith. 2 Cor. 4. 13. The spirit of loue. 2 Tim. 1. 7. Moreouer the Apostles were partakers of the diuine nature in respect of those extraordinary gifts wherewith they were endued for the execution of their Apostolicall office. Secondly, we are partakers of the godly nature, in respect of the essence of God: not that Gods essence is any part of vs; but as he is God euery where filling heauen and earth with his essence, so is he in speciall manner with, and in his children, and by his presence is effectuall in them. Whereupon Paul saith, Rom. 8. 11. The spirit of him which hath raised vp Iesus dwelleth in you. Ioh. 14. 23. If any one loue me he will keep my word, and my Father will loue him, and we will come and dwell with him. God is present with the wicked also, but it is in such sort as the Iudge is present with the malefactors. Thirdly, in this place the following of Christ is compared to the following of light, or to a lanterne that giueth light to trauellers to goe the right way without error, falling or stumbling. Such a comparison the Psalmist maketh, Psal. 119. 105. Thy word is a lanterne to my feet, that I might not stumble, nor erre. The word then, both sheweth the right way for a Christian to walke in, and guideth him in the right way to walke without offence. So that to follow the light is to haue our conuersation in this world according to the word of God, which by his sonne he hath sent and reuealed to vs, and is effectuall in them that are saued, bringing them out of the darknesse of this world into the glorious light and sunshine of his kingdome and grace. Thus much of the exhortation. It followeth now to speake of the negatiue reason inforcing the same. III. Shall not walke in darknesse. What it is to walke or liue in darknesse, the Apostle plainly declareth, Ephes. 4. 17. 18. 19. the 17 verse is a dehortation, Walke not as other Gentiles doe in the vanity of their minds. Vanity of mind is a priuation or want of true wisedome and knowledge, whereupon the imaginations of the minde, the affections of the heart, and actions of life, are not according to true wisedome and knowledge, but vaine, that is, foolish, fruitlesse, vnprofitable, to no end. Rom. 6. 21. What fruit had you then in these things whereof you are now ashamed? for the end of these things is death. In the two verses following, he farther expresseth this vaine and foolish life of the Gentiles, shewing and declaring it by the causes thereof, which are two. The first is in the 18. verse, namely the corruption of the mind. The second is in the 19, verse, and that is remorcelesnesse of conscience. The corruption of the minde stands in two things. First, in the presence of euill( hauing their cogitation darkned.) Secondly, in the absence of good( Being strangers from the life of God.) Concerning the darknesse of the minde, I thus expresse it. Man was created in the image of God, that is, in the true knowledge of God. Col. 3. 10. And haue put on the new man, which is renued in knowledge, after the image of him that hath created him, and in true righteousnesse and holinesse. Ephes. 5. 24. Put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse. This knowledge was as a pure and eleare light in the minde of man; but after that by the fall man was separated from God, this light was darkned, that is, this knowledge was corrupted with ignorance as a punishment of the fall, so that there remained onely some small notions, glimmering, or remainders of light or knowledge in him. Then againe, this light or remainder of knowledge is farther corrupted by the frowardnesse of the affections and will. Now this small remnant being taken away, there succeedeth meere darknesse, and brutish ignorance. Mat. 6. 23. If the light that is in thee be darknes, how great is that darknesse? As if he had said, if thy naturall reason be darkned through the malice of thy heart, there is nothing but meere darknesse. Secondly, the corruption of the mind standeth in the absence of good( strangers from the life of God.) Life is naturall, or spirituall; the former we haue by generation from Adam, and it is the function of the soule in motion, sense, and reason. Spirituall life is that which we haue by regeneration or new birth, which is the action of the holy Ghost begetting faith in vs, by the power whereof we destroy the body of sinne, and are renued into the image of God, which is here called the life of God. This life of God Paul doth plainly declare, Gal. 2. 19. 20. That I might liue to God I am crucified with Christ( as touching the old man) 20. Thus I liue, yet not I now, but Christ liueth in me( his spirit worketh new obedience in me.) In the words following he defineth this dying to sinne, and newnesse of life by the cause( And in that I now liue in the flesh, I liue by the faith of the sonne of God.) The Gentiles and prophane persons are far from this godly life. Furthermore this their strangenesse from the life of God is declared by the cause thereof, that is, their ignorance: their ignorance is declared by the cause also, to wit, the hardnesse of their heart, which is the peruersenesse of the will and of the affections in the heart. And because froward and peruerse men doe resist, and seeke to quench the small light that is in them, therefore God giueth them vp into a reprobate minde voide of all iudgement. Rom, 1. 28. This is the first cause of vaine, foolish, and fruitlesse liuing. The second cause is remorcelesnesse of conscience, verse 19. Which being past feeling, haue giuen themselues to wantonnesse. Custome in sinne hardneth the heart, and the heart being hardned rebelleth against the mind, and putteth out the light of reason, which bringeth a curse vpon the conscience, and taketh away all remorse of sinne, which is a token of reprobation. The Apostle calleth it a seared conscience that cannot bleed. 1 ▪ Tim. 4. 2. Thus haue I shewed what it is to walke in darknesse which is to liue, not according to the knowledge of God, and his waves, but according to the imaginations and corrupt affections of our owne hearts. And thus doe all men naturally liue, though neuer so wise, learned, ciuill, and great in the world; their whole life is foolish, fruitlesse, vnprofitable, and their end is eternall death. For the further clearing of this point, I will shew in what particulars the vaine and foolish life of the ignorant is compared to darknesse. First, darknesse is a priuation and want of light: so spirituall darknesse, that is, the ignorance, and blindnesse of the heart is a priuation, and want of the light or knowledge of God. Secondly, in darknesse all things are inuisible, one thing cannot be discerned from another: Blacke, and white, good and euill, hurtfull things and profitable things are not discerned So in spirituall darknesse, men call good euill, and euill good; sinne is delightfull and sweet to them, yea they coun tit abhomination todepart from euill. 1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein it seemeth strange vnto them, that yee run not with them to the same excesse of riot, therefore speake they euill of you. Thirdly, in darknesse a man knowes not the right way, though he be neuer so quickesighted, and although he be set in it, yet will he soone goe astray, running into by-paths and dangerous wayes, like a blind man: so in So in spirituall darknesse, ignorance of God in his word, a man knowes not the way of life: this narrow way he can not finde, &amp; though he be neuer so subtill, politicke, wise, and learned, well may he grope for the streight gate, as the men of Sodome did for Lots dore, but he shall neuer be able to finde it; and though he daily looke on it, yet shall he not discerne it: All his wayes are the wayes of death, and the good and right way seemeth to him to be the worst way. Fourthly, if this light of the sunne were not, the earth should be a very picture and resemblance of hell, a confused masse, or heape of beasts, foules, and men, one thing treading other vnder foot, nothing but hunger, thirst, cold, nakednesse, feare, terrours, sorrow, despaire, mourning, and wailing, continuall dying, one thing deuouring another: Euen so in spirituall darknesse, where the knowledge of Gods word is not, there is a resemblance of hell, and men are like diuels: there is nothing but disorder and confusion, no dueties towards God, nor towards man put in practise. Where this glorious light of the Gospell shineth not in the hearts of men, they are like to beasts and Serpents, yea, they degenerate into the natures of all noisome and venemous beasts. First, they hatch cockatrice egges, that is, whatsoeuer commeth from them is deadly poyson. Esay 59. 5. The poison of Aspes is vnder their lippes. Psal. 14. 5. Destruction and vnhappines is in their waies, verse 7. Secondly, they are vipers, children deuouring parents, and parents their children. Mat. 3. 7. Thirdly, They are as fed horses, of vnbrideled and adulterous lusts, Ier. 5. 8. Fourthly, Reioycing and neighing in the victory and downfall of their neighbours, like to strong horses. Ier. 50. 11. Fiftly, destroying their Prophets, teachers, instructors, and the poore, like to Lyons. Ier. 2. 30. Psal. 10. 9. &amp; 22. 13. Sixtly, subtile and wilely to deceiue, like Foxes. Luke 13. 32. Seuenthly, Girning and running about like dogges, if they be not satisfied in their vnsatiable desires. Psal. 59. 14. Esay 56. 11. Eightly, rauenous and greedy of the prey, full of cruelty, and without all mercy, like to wolues, Mat. 7. 15. Where the light of the Gospell shineth not in the hearts and mindes of men what can there be but pride, vaineglory, drunkennesse, excessiue drinkings, oppression, deceiuing one another, and being deceiued, euery Superiour treading his Inferiour vnder foote; politicke and craftie circumuenting one another, wily intrapping and insnaring one another; cousenage, fraudulent dealing, dissembling and lying in bargaining, bloodsucking by cruell oppression hatefull and heathenish rent-racking, vaine and prodigall spending, voluptuous liuing, and licentious gaming, murthers, enuy, ill will, contention ▪ and trouble, whoredomes, adulteteries, and wantonnesse? These and such like, are the workes of darknesse, euen of them that are aliue in body, and dead in soule. But Christ is the light of the world: they that follow him shall not liue in such darknesse, but shall haue the light of life. Thus much of the negatiue reason: the affirmatiue followeth. IIII. But shall haue the light of life. There be two lights of life, or liuely lights. First the knowledge of God in righteousnesse and holinesse, participated by the sonne of God to Adam in the creation, is called liuely light: I say, the naturall knowledge of God in Adam before the fall, was the light of naturall life, which life stood in absolute holinesse, which was his perfect obedience to the first Table, and absolute righteousnesse, which was his obedience to the second. But this liuely light by the fall was extinguished, yet not wholly, but so buried in ignorance and impurity, as it is of no force to bring forth in vs any pure worship of God, or holinesse of life, but serueth rather to bridle and restraine vs from outragious sinne, and to giue vs some light to discerne our ignorance and malice, to our owne accusation and condemnation, so that it is a deadly and not a liuely light. The second light is a new knowledge, that is, the knowledge of God in Christ. Of God in Christ reconciling the world to himselfe: of God in Christ our mercifull and louing father: of God in Christ redeeming and purchasing vs againe, when by sinne we were vtterly lost: of God in Christ restoring vs to sight, that were vtterly blinde, and ignorant: of God in Christ abolishing the body of sinne, and corruption in vs: of God in Christ renuing vs into his owne image and likenes, from which by Adams transgression we fell: of God in Christ, turning the curse of the earth, with all afflictions and troubles, into blessings and meanes to eternall blisse: of God in Christ, preparing a kingdome and heauenly Citty for vs, whose pauements, walles, and buildings are of Golde, Pearle, Emeraldes, Chrysolites, Carbuncles, and all costly ornaments, a thousand times excelling the Sanctum Sanctorum of Salomons Temple in glory. He that followeth Christ hath this liuely light in him ▪ he that followeth him not, hath no light in him, but is shut vp in ignorance and darknesse. Hee I say that denying carnall wisedome, and fleshly lusts, doth follow him, is enlightned to see and behold the glory of God in sauing the elect ▪ by and through Christ, which the Gospell setteth forth: And by vertue of this light and sauing knowledge is he made partaker of the diuine nature, that is quickned to liue the life of God, which stands in new obedience. He therefore that followeth Christ hath the light of life. What it is to haue the light of life, or to walke in the light, is plainely expressed. Ioh. 12. 35. 36. Yet a little while the light is with you; walke while yee haue light, least the darknesse come vpon you, &amp;c. Christ exhorteth heere to walke in the light, which signifieth two things. First, to beleeue in him, as it is in the verse following, while yee haue light, beleeue in the light, &amp;c. first, I say, to walke in the light signifieth to beleeue in Christ, our wisedome, righteousnesse, sanctification, redemption. Secondly, it signifieth the performance of all duties worthy of a Christian, which is to haue our conuersation according to our faith in him. For as the light of the day is giuen to vs to walke, and labour in our callings; euen so this spirituall light or day, shining in the Gospel, is giuen to vs to walke, to labour, and to liue therein. And he that walketh not in the light of the Gospell, walketh in darknesse, euen after the imagination of his owne corrupt heart, in the craftinesse and deceiueablenesse of fleshly lusts. For the further clearing of this point ▪ I will shew in what particulars this liuely &amp; sauing knowledge of God in Christ, reuealed in the Gospell, and applied to the elect by the spirit, is called Light. First, the light is so glorious a creature, that no fleshly eye can behold it, being in a subiect of nature, like it selfe, as the Sunne is: euen so the light of the Gospell is so glorious, that the eye of mans reason and vnderstanding cannot in the least measure apprehend it. Secondly, the light is pleasant, delightfull, cheerfull, comfortable, ioyfull, and hopefull; but in the absence of light there is heauinesse, sadnesse, sleepinesse, pensiuenesse, sorrowfulnesse, dispairfulnesse, fearefulnesse: euen so, this sauing knowledge placeth the soule in much more happinesse, and felicity, affording true and euerlasting pleasures, true delights, true cheerfulnesse, true comforts, true ioyes, true hope, which the miseries and afflictions of this life cannot abolish or corrupt, seeing that they are the rayes and beames of the Sunne of righteousnesse, shining in vs. How inuincible, and vnquenchable is this sauing knowledge, the light of life? Thirdly, the visible light is the life of the materiall world, maintaining life, motion, sense, in all creatures in the firmament aboue, and elements below, euen so this sauing knowledge is the life of the spirituall world, that is, the companie of Gods elect, kindling spirituall life in them, giuing spirituall wisedome, vnderstanding, reason, sense, motion, vnto them, whereby they differ from other men, more then other men differ from beasts. Fourthly, as by the shining light all things are visible to vs, and euery thing is discerned and knowne: euen so by this sauing knowledge are all things made manifest to the eyes of our minds. For by vertue hereof, we discerne betweene good and euill, betweene holinesse and prophanenesse, betweene true wisedome and worldly craftinesse, betweene the true worship of God, and idolatrie, or false-worshippe, betweene sincerity and hypocrisie, between the workes of light and darknesse, betweene Christ, and Antichrist; between God and the Diuell, who can transforme himselfe into an Angell of light, to blinde the eyes of Infidels, that they that want this knowledge discerne little or nothing at all between the one and the other, yea they altogether take the one for the other, like to the blind man that goeth confidently the contrary way. Fiftly, as the light doth enlighten the bodily eyes, whereby we see to walke in the right way, and that without stumbling or falling: euen so this sauing knowledge sheweth the right way to eternall blisse, and guideth vs without falling into the pitfalls of Satan, and this wicked world. FINIS. Iohn 21. 25. Iohn 4. 3 4. Math. 26. 55. Ioh. 4. 35. Dan. 12. 3. Iohn 15. 16. 1. Thes 2. 19. Ier. 1. 17. 1. Cor. 9. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2. Luc. 11. 54. Math. 7. 6 ▪ 1. Cor. 13. 12. Reu. 21. Esay 30. 33. August. Basil. Ioh. 12. 35. 1 Ioh. 1. 5. 1 Tim. 6. 16. Ioh. 1. 18. Wis. 9. 13. Nazian in orat. de filio Dei. Basil. in praefat. ante euang. Ioh. Ioh. 1. 4. Ephes. 2. 1. 1 Ioh. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Colos. 2. 3. Colos. 2. 8. 9. Ioh. 1. 5. Esay 53. 1. Ioh. 12. 37. Ioh. 6. 63. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Math. 5. 14. Ephes. 5. 8. Phil. 2. 15. Pro. 4. 18. Rom. 13. 12. Ioh. 1. 10. Mat. 11. 19. Ioh. 9. 24. Ioh. 3. 19. Ionas 3. 4. 5. &amp;c. Acts 7. 52. Ezech. 16. 46. Acts 5. 28. Acts 24. 5. 1 Cor. 4. 13. Ioh. 11. 48. Acts 5. 24. Mat. 15. 30. Luke 17. 17. Luke 23. 8. Mat. 8. 19. Ioh. 6. 26. Ioh. 10. 21. Ephes. 5. 1. Leu. 11. 44. 1 Ioh. 3. 7. 1 Ioh. 3. 14. Ios. 24. 14. 1 Sam. 12. 24. Ephes. 4. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Ioh. 3. 4. Rom. 8. 15. Rom. 11. 24. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Rom. 1. 13. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Ephes. 1. 14. Esay 11. 2. Rom. 8. 11. Ioh. 14. 23. Psal. 119. 105. Rom. 6. 21. Col. 3. 10. Ephes. 5. 24. Mat. 6. 23. Gal. 2. 19. 20. Rom. 1. 28. 1 Tim. 4. 2. 1 Pet ▪ 4. 4. Esay 59. 5. Psal. 14. 5. Ier. 5. 8. Ier. 50. 11. Luk ▪ 11. 32. Ioh. 12. 35. 36.PAVLS CROVVNE OF REIOYCING. OR The manner how to heare the Word with profit. By THOMAS GRANGER preacher of the word at Botterwike in Holland, neere Boston in Lincolnshire. IAMES 1. 12. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation, for when he is tried, hee shall receiue the Crowne of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that loue him. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in Yuie lane. 1616. TO THE WORSHIPFVL and vertuous Lady, the Lady, IOAN ALTHAM, temporall happinesse, and eternall blessednesse. GOOD MADAME: MAY it please your Ladyship to accept this small treatise, of the right hearing of the word. Small it is, not in respect of the subiect; for to be a good hearer is no lesse excellent a gift of grace, then to be a good speaker: but in respect of the forme, phrase, and manner of handling thereof, wherein I haue fashioned my selfe to the capacitie of vulgar ignorant people, euen such like as by Gods prouidence I haue heene called vnto, who are fitter for milke then strong meates. Yet whatsoeuer it is, such it shall be, as your Ladiship shall accept it, and to speake ingeniously without flatterie, which J euer hated, your amiable disposition to Vertue, &amp; Piety, in your yong age, as I well obserued, when heretofore I liued at the house of the good Knight Sir Iohn Leuenthorp your father; and my often remembrance thereof vpon occasions, and now vpon this occasion also, as also the singular duty that I owe to your ancient, and truly honoured familie, and to you in speciall, haue moued me, and made me the bolder to offer this vnworthy Present vnto you, desiring you to accept it only as a token of a thankfull minde, and sincere affection; which remaine euer disposed to the performance of any seruice wherein your Ladiship by me may be pleasured. Your Ladiships in all dutie to command THOMAS GRANGER. From Botterwike in Holland, neere Boston in Lincolnshire. 1616. PAVLS CROVVNE OF Reioycing. 1 THES. 2. 13. For this cause also, thanke we God without ceasing, that when yee receiued of vs the word of the preaching of God, yee receiued it not as the word of men, but as it is indeed, the word of God, which also worketh in you that beleeue. IN the former Chapter, at the second verse, the Apostle beginneth a congratulation, whereby he reioyceth in the behalfe of the Thessalonians for their effectuall faith, diligentloue, and patience in persecution, wherein they excelled, as they became ensamples to all the faithfull in Macedonia and Achaia. Now in this second Chapter from the first verse to the 13. he maketh a digression; wherin he laboreth to confirme them in this effectuall and fruitfull faith, and that by an argument drawne from his true Apostleship, which by three principall reasons hee prooueth, and approueth vnto them. 1. By his entrance in vnto them, which was not in outward shew and pompe, but in trauaile, and in the feare of God. vers. 1. 2. 2. By his preaching, which was not by insincerity, that is, false and corrupt doctrine, impure affections, and guile, but wherein he approueth himselfe to God. vers. 3. 4. 3. By his intire loue and affection towards them, in that hee vsed no flattery, coloured couetousnesse, or vaine-glory, but was gentle among them, as a nurse cherisheth her children, vers. 5. 6. 7. Now this his sincere loue and affection, hee demonstrateth by the effects, and tokens thereof, which doe testifie the sincerity, and simplicity of his heart. 1. Effect or token was his readinesse, to deale not onely the Gospell vnto them, but euen his owne soule, vers. 8. 2. Was his labour and trauell, because he would not be chargeable vnto them, whereof they had experience, vers. 9. 3. Was his holy, godly, and righteous conuersation among them, vers. 10. 4. His faithfulnesse in executing his office for their good; in exhorting them, comforting them, and intreating them( as a father his children) to walke according to their reall calling, vers. 11. 12. Now taking occasion at these duties of his ministery; namely his exhorting of them, his comforting of them, and beseeching of them: he returneth to his former gratulation in the 13 and 14 verses: wherein hee also reioyceth in their behalfe, because they receiued the word, not as his word, but as the word of God, that sent him; whereof this was a manifest token, euen their conuersion, their faith, and obedience, and daily increase therein. In this gratulation, two things are to be considered, the Manner and the Matter. First, concerning the manner, or forme thereof, it is expounded by way of thankesgiuing to God, the author of this harmony &amp; concord betweene him the Pastour teaching them from God, and them his stocke receiuing his doctrine as from God. In that hee expounds his gratulation by way of thanksgiuing, he teacheth them two things: first ▪ that his preaching, labour, industrie, and gifts, wrought not this faith, and obedience in them, but God by his spirit inwardly, and by his Ministery outwardly. 1 Cor. 3. 5. 6. Who is Paul, who Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye beleeued, as God hath giuen to euery man? Ego plantaui, Apollos rigauit, &amp;c. The Apostle therefore considering how apt we are of our selues to attribute too much to the meanes, and to insist on the second cause, reuoketh them to God the principall cause, that hee alone may be praised; and glorified for all thiugs, and in all things. 2. He teacheth them hereby, that their faith is not of themselues, but of God, and that thereof both he and they by his example ought to glorifie God in giuing him thanks for this grace. Againe, whereas he giueth thanks without ceasing, he first sheweth his faithfulnes, his loue, earnest desire, that hee had of their conuersion, and now his great reioycing in their conuersion: which two things are euident tokens of a true Apostle: great thankes, and continuall thankes,( you know) do presuppose a great good turne; and such a benefit that one acknowledgeth himselfe euer the better for: so the Apostle preferres here this benefit, euen the blessing of his Ministery in their faith and obedience, before the cheifest earthly blessing, and in the 19. verse hee saith, they were his hope. his ioy, and crowne of reioycing, Likewise in Phil. 4. 1. he calls them his beloued, his longed for, his ioy, and his crowne. 2. Whereas he giueth thankes without ceasing, he doth put them in minde, exhort, and warne them, to be continually thankefull for this endlesse loue, mercy, and grace of God: in calling them out of darkenesse into his meruailous light. Such a benefit as this, whereby we doe not onely escape death, but obtaine eternall life, ought we alwaies to remember, and by all meanes to manifest our thankfulnesse for the same; both heart, mouth, and hand, ought to be enlarged, euer to praise, and thanke him by thought, word and deede, otherwise if wee be not for euer thankefull for this endlesse benefit, we may iustly prouoke the Lord to shorten his hand, and to take his graces from vs. Lastly, whereas hee giueth thankes without ceasing we obserue what is the greatest matter of ioy, and reioycing to a faithfull shepheard, namely, the faith and obedience of his flock to his doctrine, instructions, and exhortations; not as from him, but as from God: as the husbandman reioyceth in a plentifull haruest, forgetting all his labours and trauels in seede time; euen so the true shepheard reioyceth in the fruits of his labours, and seeing a plentifull haruest towards, is glad that God hath made him an instrument to gather his wheate, euen the soules of men, into his Barne. The Minister hath cause of reioycing, and thankesgiuing in the faithfull discharge of his calling, when his conscience doth assure him, that he hath kept himselfe innocent from the bloud of all men, and hath kept nothing back, but to his vtmost power and grace giuen him, hath declared all the counsell of God, by word, and example of life, Act 20. 26. 27. he hath I say cause of reioycing herein, though hee see no fruits of his labours, as the Apostle saith 2 Cor. 2. 15. Wee are vnto God the sweete sauour of Christ, in them that are saued, and in them that perish. But when his ministerie is effectual in men to beget and increase faith in them, to regeneration, and to eternall life, then is he the sauour of life vnto life, and there is double matter of reioycing, and thankesgiuing. Paul little reioyced in his owne grace, and conscionable discharge of his owne dutie, neither esteemed much all his labours and sufferings, when he saw them not effectuall in the conuerting sinners vnto God: but when hee had done all that he could, he complaineth that he had run in vaine, Gal. 4. 11. I am in feare of you, least I haue bestowed labour on you in vaine. i. seeing no fruit of my labour in your conuersion. The matter of the gratulation, and thanksgiuing, is their Faith, which is not simply named, but propounded by way of circumlocution, and as it were described by certaine degrees. The first degree in this description, or rather definition of their faith, is their hearing of the word,[ when yee receiued of vs the word of the preaching of God,] which words in the greeke are thus,[ because receiuing the word of hearing from vs of God:] both haue one meaning, but I rather follow the Greeke verbatim, because he speaketh here especially of their act of beleeuing, the first degree whereof is hearing, and emplyeth his act of preaching in these words( from, or of vs.) It is called the word of the hearing of God, because there is no light or ground of the Gospell in mans reason; he hath not the least sparkle of this knowledge of God in Christ in him, therefore the Apostle saith, Rom. 10. 14. Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the Preacher. Adam was created perfect man in all the faculties of his reasonable soule, yet was hee without this knowledge, which was hid in God, and reuealed, and preached to him by God himselfe after his fall, Gen. 3. 15. who foreseeing the fall, foresaw the remedy also. This sauing knowledge God likewise reuealed to Abraham, Gen. 18. 18. and afterward preached the same by typicall ceremonies, and by the Prophets, to his church: lastly, by his owne Sonne, who hath reuealed all the wisdome of God, concerning mans iustification, and saluation, and accomplisht the same in himselfe; and the sonne hauing all power and authoritie giuen of his Father in heauen and earth, hath preached the same to vs Gentiles, by his Apostles, and Euangelists, Pastours, and Teachers: Againe, it is called the word of hearing after the imitation of the Hebrew, for the word heare, or which you heard. Now to heare this word of faith preached, is meerely of grace, and is the first degree of faith. The gracelesse, viz. naturall men, will not patiently heare this word of the preaching of God: it is to them foolishnes, and vaine talke, for they make this doctrine and profession groundlesse, and to no end. Groundlesse, because they comprehend not the same by their carnall reason: To no end, because they measure euery thing by the worldly vse, profit, or pleasure thereof. 1 Cor. 1. 18. Praedicatio Euang. est ijs qui periunt stultitia. In Act. 7. 57. 58. The Iewes stopped their eares at Stephens preaching &amp;c. Act. 19 24. The multitude of the Ephesians when Alexander shewed them ▪ of Paul and his doctrine, &amp;c. Act. 23. Ananias the high Priest caused Paul to be smitten on the mouth, in the very beginning of his Apologie. The Turkes, Iewes, and Papists are ready to stop their eares as soone as they heare the truth. Yea, and many protestant Atheists, and Epicures, would at no hand heare the word, if they were at their owne libertie: they hate and deride the very name of a Preacher, and cannot looke on a blacke coate,( as these blacke mouthed hell-hounds terme them) with a patient eye; which shewes that they hate our calling, and are the enemies of God, and their owne saluation: And that enuious &amp; murtherous heart which shewes it selfe now in mocks, and taunts, would shew it selfe in open rage and cruelty, if it were not bound in with chains and bonds of iron. 2. Degree of their Faith, is in these first words,[ when ye receiued of vs &amp;c.] This is the second degree of faith; after we haue heard the word, to giue assent in general to the same, as true, and to approue of it as good. And this is also meerely of grace; for there are many which heare ▪ but their hearing is not mingled with faith, and therefore they profit nothing by hearing, Heb. 4. 2. The Gospell was preached to them, as also to vs: but the word which they heard profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in those that heard it. And Paul saith, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man perceiueth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishinesse vnto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. In Acts 17. 18. When Paul preached at Athens, certaine Philosophers of the Epicures and Stoikes heard him, but some counted him a babler, and others, a setter forth of strange Gods. This generall consent vnto the word preached in man, is of grace, but this is not sauing grace, for the Deuills beleeue also and tremble, Iames 2. 19. I say it is of grace in man, because he cannot do this by supernaturall light; but the Diuels by light of nature, not by created light, but by obseruation. 3. Degree of their faith is expressed in the middle of the verse, in these words[ ye receiued it, &amp;c.] This word, receiued, is twise vsed in the english, but it is of differing significations, as the Greeke, and Latine doe shew: The former is in Greeke 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, accipere, the latter is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 excipere: the former whereof signifieth to receiue or take willingly, or vnwillingly, or after any sort: the latter signifieth to entertaine or receiue willingly, to welcome: Therefore of this word commeth 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, the right hand. That which we doe vnwillingly, is done as it were with the left hand, sinisterly and vntowardly; but that which we do willingly, it is done as it were with the right hand, dexterouslie, aptly, and handsomely: to receiue the word, here, therefore signifies to welcome, to embrace with willingnes and liking, and to apply it to themselues. This is then the third degree of Faith, to welcome, entertaine, embrace the word with readinesse, willingnesse, loue, delight, and to apply the same particularly to our owne hearts and consciences. This is also of meere grace, without which grace none can be saued. Many heare the word with the outward eare, many do also vnderstand it, and beleeue it to be true, but few receiue the same into the heart, to giue it intertainment, and rooting there. In Acts 8. 21. Simon Magus beleeued the Gospell historically, yet Peter saith there, that his heart was not vpright in the sight of God. In Acts 5. 3. Ananias beleeued the Gospell, and seemed to bring forth fruits thereof, as did the other Christians, but it was not rightly receiued into the heart, for hypocrisie which is is the worke of Satan, and sauing faith, which is the worke of the spirit, cannot dwell together in one heart. Iudas vnderstood, and beleeued the word, and was a Preacher thereof, but it was neuer intertayned and rooted in his heart, but thorny couetousnesse was rooted therein, which in the end choaked the word. So 2 Tim. 4. 10. Demas was a follower of Paul, but the loue of the world was neuer rooted out of his heart, therefore in time it choaked the word, &amp;c. Iulian the Apostata, giue intertainment to the word, but pride was neuer rooted out of his heart, therefore it choaked the word in him, 1 Tim. 5. 11. Paul speakes of young widowes, that hauing entertained and professed the word, doe afterward waxe wanton against Christ, and break their first faith, because concupiscence and fleshly lust was neuer rooted out of their hearts, therefore it choaked the word in them. When as the word is receiued into the heart, together with these and such like lusts, which our Sauiour Christ calleth thornes, Math. 13. 24. the thornes being naturall to the heart, and therefore hauing strong rooting, must needs in time ouergrow and choake the word; euen as weedes being naturall to the earth, doe ouergrow and pine away the corne, that it cannot fructifie. And this is the condemnation of the multitude, I meane of the common hypocriticall Protestants, which giue entertainment to the word, but expell not their beloued company, or guest, their head personall sinne, with the branches and fruits thereof: either must Christ, and that sinne dwell together; or else must Christ be expelled, that it may rule. But cast out the bond-woman with her children, for shee and her sonnes cannot be heyre with the free, if Isaack be heyre, then must Ishmael be cast out: and if the birth-right belong to Iacob, Esau cannot haue it. Crucifie the olde man with his children, the lusts of ignorance, and the workes of darkenesse: for if the sonne of God by his word and spirit hath taken possession of your hearts, and dwell therein, as owner and heyre, then cannot the bond-womans sonne be heyre, whether it be pride, or couetousnesse, or enuy, or fleshly lust, which spring out of originall corruption. The word of God and naturall lust cannot both dwell together, they cannot both be heyres, they cannot both be maisters, but being contrary one to the other, the one of them will haue the dominion and vpper hand: sinne and Satan lay claime to all by right of antient inheritance, from many descents, but the word is the sword of the spirit, driuing them out of the heart, and cutting them downe. As Ioshuahs sword slue all the ancient inhabitants of Canaan, and placed the Israelites therein; euen so must wee cast out and subdue these Canaanitish lusts and affections, the word must be as a sword, or sacrificing knife in vs to cut downe these ancient in-bred inhabitants, worldly lusts; yea, as the Land of Canaan spued forth her Inhabitants, so must we cleare our hearts of this menstruous filth, that they may be Temples for the holy Ghost, euen as Salomons Temple, beautified and adorned with holinesse, righteousnes, faith, goodnes, meekenesse, loue, truth, continence, temperance, and all vertue. 4. Degree of Faith, is their intertayning and embracing of the word in such sort as is peculiar, and proper to the word which is propounded: first, negatiuely,[ not as the word of Men,] and then affirmatiuely( but as the word of God.) Heerein appeareth euidently the difference betweene hypocrites, and true beleeuers. Infidels heare the word of God altogether as the word of man: Hypocrites receiue the word of God as the word of man, that is, they allow it to be the word of God, so farre forth as it is agreeable to their liking, and wherein it differeth from them, they contemne, and put it off from them, as but the word of man: this is therefore the meere and especiall, and sauing grace of God, to receiue the word as from God, and not from Man. The Pharisees heard the pure word of the Gospell from the mouth of the Sonne of God himselfe, but because he was in the shape and forme of man, therefore they receiued it but as the word of man, Iohn 8. 13 Thou bearest record of thy selfe, &amp;c. Mark 6. 2. Our Sauiour Christs Countrymen, friends, &amp; kinsfolks, hearing his wisedome, and seeing his workes, were astonied, but beleeued not in him: What was the cause? Vers. 3. Is not this the Carpenter, Maryes Sonne, brother of Iames &amp; Ioses? &amp;c. They looked with fleshly eyes on his outward appearance only, and esteemed his word but according to his outward appearance; therefore it became vnprofitable to them. Such like Pharisees are the heads of the Romish Church, the teachers and maintainers of hypocrisie, which auouch that the written word hath no authority with vs ▪ but by their approbation, and what is their approbation? First, they wrest it to such a sence as may serue for the erecting and maintaining of their owne authority, and their Antichristian synagogue, and then hauing adulterated it, and made it their owne word, they giue allowance to it. Heereupon euery Impe of that Church will not heare the word, as the word of God, but as of the Church, that is, of the Pope, and his Cardinals; and in this they rest satisfied, and resolued, thinking it heresie to receiue the word meerely as the word of God. Of this sort are all prophane Esaues and Epicurish Politicians, which count themselues Protestants, but are not: they acknowledge and receiue the olde and new Testament, as the word of God, but as for Doctrines, Instructions, Vses, and especially Applications thereof, they receiue as but the word of men, and chiefly, when the application thereof concernes their reformation in particular. As the Papist counts the true interpretation of Scriptures heresie, and vnder that name reiects it; so the carnall Gospeller counts the true vses and applications of the word, precisenes, and vnder that name or terme contemnes it. So that as the one denyes the truth and embraceth errour; so the other confessing the truth in generall, doth wilfully refuse it in particular, and liueth after his owne lust, without the word: and whether of these is the better? What is the cause that many doe not heare and receiue the word with that reuerence and obedience as they ought, as their whole life and conuersation doth shew? It is because they receiue it as the word of man: for if they were fully perswaded and seriously beleeued that it were the very word of God, they would not so lightly regard it, and liue so dissolutely: For who dare be bold to fight against God? Who dare contemne him, and deride him to his face, as many doe? If men dare not doe this to an earthly Prince, without feare, yea cold feare troubling their thoughts, and loosing the ioynts of their loynes; how comes it to passe, that they dare so boldly chalenge God the combate, and with petulant derision prouoke him? The reason is, because they receiue it as the word of man, and thinke they haue to deale with man, and not with God; this is the cause of their contempt and disobedience: For if they were touched with any sence or feeling of the presence of Gods maiesty, and that they receiued the word as from his owne mouth; surely there is no man liuing, that durst so dally and trifle with the word, much lesse withstand it, or haue it in derision. It is a maruell therefore to see and heare how many take liberty to themselues to dally with, and to make a ieast of the Word, to be touched with no reuerence or feare of the same. But indeed, what maruell is it to see an infant thrust his hand into the fire without feare, or doubting? or to see a blinde man goe willingly into the pit? or a drunkard inraged with wine, to run desperately on the swords point? or a madde man to kill himselfe? Did not the rebellious Israelites deride the word of the Lord sent to them by all his Prophets? Did not Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their consorts, wittingly and wilfully rebell against the Lord in the person of Moses, whose authority they saw euen with their owne eyes, that it was giuen him of God? Did not the Israelites cast off the Lord, from being their Gouernour in the person of Samuell? They haue not cast thee away, but they haue cast mee away, that I should not raigne ouer them. 1 Sam. 8 7. Did not the Iewes contemn and cast off the word of the Lord spoken by Ieremie, saying that it was not the Lords word, but the malicious counsell of Baruch? Ier. 43. 2. 3. Did not the counsel of the Iewes with the high Priest, count the Gospell sedition, and rebellion, which the Apostles taught, as Gods owne spirit gaue them vtterance? Acts 5. 28. Did not Tertullus the Orator count Paul a pestilent fellow, a moouer of sedition, and an heretike? Acts 24. 5. Yea if wee recount from the beginning of the world, wee shall see that infidells, and hypocrites haue alwaies heard and receiued the word of the Lord, as the word of man, and vnder that pretence haue euer with stood the same, and cast it off from them, especially if it were not to their owne liking, or that they could not politickely make some vse of it for their bodily turnes. No maruell then is it, if in these latter Atheisticall and Epicurish dayes the word of the Lord take no place among many, but be turned lightly off as the word of man, yea, and had in derision, as but the vnaduised, rash, and indiscreet speeches of a phantasticall, spleenfull, or precise fellow, as Eli supposed the sober, and feruent prayers of Anna; and certaine Iewes termed the gifts of the holy Ghost drunkennesse. But this were a maruell if that God should come from heauen in the shape of a man,( for no mortall man can liue in his glorious presence) and should conuerse familiarly with vs, preaching the glad tidings of the Gospell in all lenity and mildenesse, hauing in his person, doctrine, and conuersation matter to prouoke and allure all men, euen the poorest, the meanest, the ignorantest, the Publicane, the sinner, the weake-harted, the troubled conscience to follow him, embrace him, loue him, reioyce in him, being meeke &amp; lowly in heart, mercifull, and pittifull, mourning and sorrowing for the hardnesse of mans heart, weeping for our miseries, calling all to repentance, refusing none that in any sincerity came vnto him; louing all, in whom any token of present, or future grace appeared, reprouing onely the enemies of mans saluation, pride, enuy, hypocrisie, couetousnesse, and threatning iudgements against hard-hearted and obstinate rebels, who seeke their owne glory in the destruction of Gods glory and kingdome, and are enemies to their owne saluation, and all other mens; nay, and besides this, should not onely giue no appearance of euill, but shew forth the glory of his God-like maiesty in all his words and workes, publike and priuate. It were a maruell I say, if any man receiued not his word, as the word of God, being God himselfe, and in all humility, reuerence, and obedience, followed not him, and yeelded not himselfe to doe homage vnto him. Euen thus was God conuersant among his owne people the Iewes, in the true shape of man; but his owne receiued him not: they heard his word, but as the word of man, and esteemed his life and holy conuersation, but as of an ordinary man: but this is more wonderfull, that God preaching in the forme of man should be reiected as a deceiuer, as a chiefe sinner, as a worker with euill spirits, as not worthy to liue among men. Indeede if that Christ had preached some new and strange thing neuer heard of before, they might haue had some pretence of reiecting his word; but seeing that hee taught nothing, but that which Moses, and the Prophets foretold, whose Disciples they profest themselues to be, and whom they beleeued; and yet beleeued not him, but making him contrary to Moses, Ioh 9. 28. who plainely set before their eies, put into their eares, and euen thrust into their hands all that they heard, and read in Moses and the Prophets euery day, that they might heare, and see euen with bodily eyes and eares, and handle the word of life: It is a wonderfull thing I say, that they should not receiue his word as the word of Moses, and the Prophets, and consequently of God. What sottish stupidity is this? What should thus bewitch them, that being bereft of common sense, as it were, they should deny that especially which they most professed, and reiected that by all meanes as most detestable, which they most glory in, and boasted of? Nay, if we consider the cause hereof, it is no wonderfull or strange thing, but naturall and common, if wee could but reflect our eyes vpon our selues, to see the things within vs, as we doe the things without vs, but it is giuen to very few to discerne the times, and seasons by application of the true light to the same, which maketh euery thing manifest as it is. The cause heereof, was the bewitching hypocrisie of the hart; for howsoeuer they pretended religion, deuotion and zeale, and therein matched the Romish Iesuites, yet was not the same truly rooted in their harts, but pride, ambition, vaine-glory, couetousnesse, and enuy were deepely rooted, and firmely setled therein, which sinnes being coloured with fayre pretences of religion, blinded not onely the eies of the world, but euen their owne eyes, that their religious titles, prayers, fastings, almes, and other outward works were but cloaked and coloured pride, vaineglory, couetousnes, oppression: and this true body, namely, their outward profession, had not a true soule in it, but an euill spirit or Deuill, vsing this body deceitfully, and craftily for his owne aduantage. For, this is the nature of the hypocriticall heart, to transforme euen the best, and holiest exercises of religion into the nature of it selfe, that is, to serue it selfe of them. These holy Deuils of the Iewish Church, retayning the bare names, and liuelesse titles of their Iewish priuiledges, as to be called the Israell of God, the children of Abraham, &amp;c. As also the outward ceremonies of the Law, together with their owne ambitious traditions, and gainfull dispensations; but being of worldly hearts and spirits, were so farre from the true knowledge, and spirituall meaning of the Law, of the types and ceremonies thereof, as also of the Prophets, as that they could not abide to heare the same, sounding to their eares as strange and new doctrine; for bare titles, and the outward barke serued their turnes, hauing no farther sauour of religion, nor loue of the truth in them. Therefore when Christ preached the Law and the Prophets spiritually, which they professed, and wherein they boasted carnally. It was a hard preaching, who could heare it? Iohn 6. The Papist doth marueile at the stupidity, and vtterly condemne the obstinacy of the Pharisees, and Iewes for their contempt of the Gospell, and shamefull intreatment of the sonne of God, and for their hypocrisie, pride, couetousnesse, enuy, &amp;c. And the Friars and Iesuites in their Sermons worke vpon the passions of men, to prouoke and inflame their hearts to an hatred of them, for hating the Gospell, and putting our blessed Sauiour to death. Surely it is a wonderful thing to consider the darknesse of their hard hearts, that they haue no sight at all in themselues of these things, for which they vtterly condemne the Iewes, being no lesse enemies of Christ then the Iewes. The Pharisees holding, and maintayning the true principles of the law, and Prophets, did in their Interpretations, Expositions, and speciall Applications, swarue so far from the true meaning thereof, through the darkenesse of their earthly hearts, as they became vtter enemies of the truth therein contained, for Christ was the truth, the end and fulfilling thereof, whom they pointed at, and whom the Pharisees heard and saw, speaking and fulfilling the same in their eyes, and eares, yet will they not be his Disciples, but Moses Disciples, Iohn 9. making Moses and Christ contrary, whereas indeede they themselues were contrary to themselues, for if they had knowne and professed Moses, and the Prophets spiritually, and truly, then had they knowne Christ, and beene his followers, but being carnall professours, they are vtter enemies of the truth which they professed. Let common Protestants note this well. Euen so, in the very same manner, the Romish Synagogue, with the whole Antichristian rout, houlding the true principles of the Gospell, the olde and new Testament, and the abridgements of the same, to wit, the Creede, the Commandements, and Lords prayer, doe in their Interpretations, Expositions, Glosses, and particular Applications of the word, so farre and wide run astray from the true meaning thereof, as they are vtter enemies of the truth persecuting the true professours of the same, vnder the names of heretickes, as the Iewes persecuted Christ vnder the name of a seducer and deceiuer. The Pharisees built their false sect, doctrines and deuotions vpon the true ground, or principles of the Law and Prophets, so doe the Romanists build their Antichristian Synagogue, their false doctrines, workes and deuotions vpon Christ, the Prophets, Euangelists and Apostles. But heere is the cunning of the Deuill, who as he sees God in his great wisdome to bring good good out of euill, yea, to turne all his Satanicall policies and deuises vpon his owne head, and to worke himselfe glory out of his plot of dishonour and subuersion: euen so on the contrary he bringeth euill out of good, turning the truth of God into a lye, yea, vpon Gods truth and ordinance builds hee his owne kingdome, but this bay and stubble built vpon the true foundation shall be burnt by the fire of Gods spirit, 1 Cor. 3. 15. and the plant which he hath not planted shall wither away, and be rooted out, Math. 15. 13. Now seeing that they haue built a false Church vpon a true foundation, soothing vp themselues in their outward priuiledges, and liuelesse titles, making their owne lawes, doctrines, traditions, and innumerable deale of beggarly baggagement the rule of conscience and holy life, put the case, that Iesus Christ the onely truth were to come, or that it should please his glorious Maiesty, to come from heauen into the Church of Rome( which professeth it selfe to be the onely and holy flocke of Christ) in such manner as he came among the Iewes, instructing and teaching the people euery where, in truth, sincerity, and without partiality, prouing his doctrine by the written word,( which themselues acknowledge and professe) as hee did the Gospell among the Iewes by Moses and the Prophets, and confirming the Doctrine with miracles; as also conuincing and reprouing them for their Idolatry, superstition, false doctrine, vaine ceremonies, traditions, godly lies, wicked dispensations, ambition, pride, tyranny, cruelty, excessiue couetousnesse, extortion, bribery ▪ and all the heathenish abhominations of that holy denne of theeues: If I say that Christ were at Rome amongst them at this instant, in such appearance life, conuersation, and doctrine, as he was among the Iewes, I demand what manner of intertainment should be giuen him? And whether his word and doctrine should be receiued as the word of God, or as the word of man? whether it should be receiued as the trueth of God, or reiected as heresie? Euen as the King of Niniueth, with the Princes, Rulers, Nobles and Commons beleeued the word of God spoken by Ionah, layd his robe from him, couered him with sackcloath, and sate in ashes; and proclaimed that neither man, beast, bullocke, nor sheepe should feede ▪ or drinke water; that man and beast should put on sackcloth, and cry mightily vnto God, and turne from his euill way, and the wickednesse that was in his hands. Ionah 3. So it may be that the Pope with his Cardinals, Fryers, Monkes, Priests, &amp;c. together with the whole Citie of Rome would beleeue his word, and receiue it as the word of Christ. It may be, they would acknowledge him, reuerence him, and honour him, humbly submitting to his doctrine, confessing their errors and sinnes, and suffer themselues to be rightly enformed, and reformed by him, their guide, gouernour, and chiefe shepheard of their soules. But I rather thinke, that he should haue far worse intertainment among them, then amongst the Pharisies and Iewes, and Heathen, that they would persecute both his doctrine and person with all indignities, that might be deuised, and because of his true miracles confounding their lying wonders, would iudge him to be Antichrist,( of whom they haue already made Luther the fore-runner) euen as the Pharisies counted him the greatest Sorcerer, and to deale with the Prince of the Deuills, by whose power he exceeded all other: I suppose that they which so deuoutly worship and adore the Image of Christ, and of the Apostles, beautifying the same with such sumptuous ornaments, and ouerlaying of gold, would by all meanes dishonour the true Christ. And his Apostles, not onely contemning their persons, and condemning their doctrines, but also putting them to ignominious deaths. I suppose that Seruus seruorum Dei, would hardly re-deliuer the chayre, giue the right hand, or wall to Peter. For as the Pharisies did to Christ the head, so doe they to his Apostles and members likewise. And as Antichrist doth now to the true Ministers and members, so would he doe to the head: For the afflictions of Christ are accomplished in his members by Antichrist, who should also suffer the same in his owne person, if hee were in the state of humiliation vpon the earth, as he was. Surely may some say, it were a maruellous thing, if it should be so, I would thinke rather that Christ, and his Apostles, teaching the same doctrines, and working the same, or such like miracles, should be heard and receiued of the Pope, his Cardinalls, &amp;c. as hee was of the faithfull in the Iewish Church. I answere, if hee should come indeede, as Ignatius Loyala that prophane and bloudy souldier, a Spaniard, the Father of the Iesuites, * came to Pope Paulus the third, deuoting himselfe and his Disciples to him, promising absolute obedience to him, in all things, without any exception, and binding himselfe with an inuiolable oath, that hee would, to his vttermost power maintaine and vphold the Romish Church and See by all meanes possible, if( I say) both his doctrine and miracles might serue for the glorifying of that carnall Idoll-gull, and vpholding of his worldly Synagogue and See; then without doubt hee shall haue great intertainement, and in such sort also might he haue been intertained of the Pharisies, yea of Herod, or any worldling. But now to come neerer to our selues, what if Christ were in state of humiliation, and in the very same outward appearance among vs, as hee was among the Iewes; or Paul, Peter, or any of the Apostles, preaching the same Gospel that is now preached( for none other Gospell could Christ himselfe preach, than this which is already preached) and expounding the seuerall texts thereof, as hee did of the Prophets in the Temple, and in the Synagogues, handling the same in speciall, and in particular, applying the same fitly according to all circumstances, yea, speaking as his and their manner was, to the heart, conscience, and spirit? how should his words be heard? whether as the words of God, or as of man? It may be he should be receiued of all men, as hee was of Lazarus, of Martha and Mary, who poured a pound of very costly ointment on his head, who washed his feete with her teares, and wiped them with the hayres of her head. It may be that all men would weep aboundantly, fall on his necke, and kisse him, as the Christians did at Pauls departure from them; Acts 20. 37. It may be that by all meanes possible, they would shew their loue to him, by prostrate obeysance, and humble obedience, by contemning all worldly things in comparison of his presence, yea, and by preferring one word of his mouth before all humane learning and knowledge. It may be that all men from the highest to the lowest, from the richest to the poorest, from the mightiest to the weakest would wholly submit, and subiect themselues to the obedience of his word and doctrine, taking more pleasure therein, than in all worldly pleasure and profit, and deuote all their worldly goods, might, wisedome, and learning to the aduancement thereof, and there is no question, but some of all degrees and estates would sincerely and deuoutly, according to the gift of grace and measure thereof doe these things, yea, many doubtlesse would loue him, embrace him, reuerence him, for the Gospels sake, and admiring him would say, doubtlesse the spirit of God is plentifull, and very strong in this man, so gracious are his words, so holy is his conuersation amongst vs, as wee may see true Christianity perfectly acted, euen as the word teacheth and commandeth. But on the other side, what entertainment should he finde in the world, I meane among the brutish sinners, the ciuilly honest, and the pharisaically religious, for these are they that are called the World? In what manner would carnall Gospellers heare and receiue his pure, spirituall, and heauenly Sermons? What manner of tast and relish would his words haue in their eares? What repentance would there be wrought? What confession? Contrition? Satisfaction of wrongs done, with Zacheus? What conuersion? What obedience to his doctrine? What reformation either of themselues, or of those, and those things, that are in their power to alter, and order according to his doctrine? How would sinners and wicked liuers heare him! I meane all such as propound their owne glory and profits, or pleasures, the end of all their actions, and endeauors, inwardly and outwardly; for they that make these and such like things their principall ends, can neither doe good deed, speake good word, nor thinke good thought all their life long. How would the greedy churle heare him, that loues to think and meditate of nothing but gaine? to speake nor doe any thing that tends not one way or other to his bodily profit? How would the lustfull person heare him, that makes his whore and wanton woman his Idoll? How would many rauening Lawyers, &amp; such as make authority a cloake of destruction &amp; vnhappines,( too many now a daies) heare him, that stand continually waiting and gaping for the bride, whereby the poore is oppressed, the hands of reuengeful persons, &amp; of cruell churles are strengthened against their neighbours; and whereby the mouthes of superstitious and prophane liuers are opened, and hands strengthened against God himself, in his Word and Ministers? How would( I say) worldlings of all sorts heare him? How would they entertaine him? What would they say of him? Euen as the Iewes did say, doe, and Iudge of the Prophets and seruants of God then, and as we doe esteeme the faithfull Ministers and religious professors now; so would too many( if authority brideled them not) speake, doe, and Iudge of Christ himselfe, or the Apostles being conuersant among vs, as then they were among them. Some sayd, he is a good man; other sayd, nay, but hee seduceth the People, Iohn 7. 12. Some would say he is too strict, too precise, phantasticall; such kinde of Christianity can no where be acted; of too spiced a conscience, malecontent, he cannot tell what he would haue, nothing can please him, there can be neither loue nor good fellowship; but contention and mislike one of another where such preaching is: hee meddles too far in matters that concerne him not: hee thinkes there is none so wise and godly as himselfe; his parents and friends are of small reputation among their neighbours, hee is of very meane education, few of the richer or wiser sort make any great reckoning of him. If he were of ability, power, friends and learning, as hee is but meane and bare, hee would happily prooue a dangerous fellow; for he is very bold, hee vses very broad speeches, and takes too much liberty to himselfe, to speake of such things, as better men then himselfe will not talke of: he must haue an oare in euery mans boate, he makes euery man his text; a melancholy fellow, not of a sound braine, very malitious, and spleenefull; vnlesse I and many more be deceiued, some thinke that hee hath beene beside himselfe: I haue seene him chollericke enough for all his mildnesse, and heard him raile on his betters; hee will be taken vp ere it be long at one hand or other. These and such like things would worldlings speake of him, and( I feare) farre worse: for they that sticke in the outward letter and bare titles of religion and Christianity, haue beene, are, and alwaies will be, vtter enemies of the life and spirit thereof, to the true Preachers and sincere professors thereof, being like to the earthly and bloudy Edomites, which vnder the title of circumcision, and the children of Abraham, claimed to themselues the chiefe religion, and hated the true worshippers of God. For the further clearing of this point, I will bring in two interlocutors, or speakers, Eulalus and Mataeologus, in which two persons you may easily behold the estate and conditions of these times, and see the common carnall Protestant set forth in his colours. Mataeologus. Au, I pray you iudge charitably of your brethren, you run out now too farre. Eulalus. A man may be charitable though hee be not foolish. Hee may be charitable, though he iustifie not Esaus, that preferre their bellies, profits, and pleasures before Gods kingdome, and mocking Ismaels, that being heyres of worldly things, haue the children of God in derision, because they haue not, or because they will not worship the golden Image Mammon, nor reuerence them, nor count them the happier for their Image sake. Mataeol. These and such vnhallowed speeches are too common in the mouthes of many precise fellows, there is nothing with them but Scripture, but others that haue not the Scriptures in their mouthes, so much[ and therefore neither in their hearts,] are as good as they, for ought I[ blind Bayard] see. What, doe you thinke, because wee regard not them so much, that therefore we would not regard our blessed Sauiour, or the holy Apostles, if they were in mans appearance among vs? there is none but they would spend goods, body, and life for him: there is none vnlesse very few( such as thou art) but they would leaue all, and follow him, yea we would resigne all that wee haue, and all that wee are into his hands, to dispose at his gracious will and pleasure, or else we were as ill as the Iewes, as Pilate and the Pharisees, and worthy to goe to hell with them:( I doubt you will proue your selfe to be little better in the end.) Eulalus. I would be loath to prouoke you to anger, my purpose is in friendly manner to reason with you, not to offend you. Let vs speake of an other matter. This question was put forth to me by a friend of mine a while agoe, &amp;c. What if a Lion were changed into a Lambe, whether would the old sheepe be afraid and run away from him? Mataeolog. Why, common reason answereth that question, at the first hearing, if the Lion were turned into a Lambe, hee should be counted and vsed as a Lambe, and hee might well be afraid of other things, that before were afraid of him. Eulalus. You say well, and as the thing is. What is a man went to the wars in a far country, and had been forth twenty yeeres, many men supposing that hee may be aliue, some doubting that he is dead, some auouching that he is aliue, and will come shortly. Now if this man came in the forme of a poore man, or a seruant, to his owne house, as Vlisses did, what would his owne family say and doe to him? Mataeolog. I thinke he should haue Vlisses intertainment, they would mocke and deride him, and thrust him out by the head and shoulders if he troubled them too much, and send for the Constable to carry him away to the stockes if he would not be ruled, and be gone. Eulalus. What if a King should disroabe himselfe of his glory, and come among his subiects, in the outward shew of a poore man, or a seruant? put the case that he should come to dwell in your towne, behauing himselfe harmelesly and innocently among you, obeying all his owne lawes to the full, and good orders of your parish, what would men say, and iudge of him? Mataeolog. I think e there is none, but they would count him an honest poor man, though there be some that is apt to speake badly enough, whem small occasion is offered, and if he were neuer so good, he should neuer please all parties, for our towne is as the rest of the world is. Eulalus. But what if he should begin to meddle in your townes matters, and to finde fault with your rich men for their vniust, hard, and vnlawfull dealings, likely enough, all in your parish obserue not law, nor good order, especially if it be not for their profit: some are wronged and oppressed among you, the small offences of some are made heynous crimes, some doe manifest wrong, and liue in bad and dishonest sort, and yet no man dare speake of it: I say not that there are such in your towne, but put the case there were such. Mataeolog. To tell you the truth( for I haue known their dealings, and their qualities a long time) there were no abiding for him among them, if hee speake but a word against some of them, though it were manifest troth, hee were farre better runne his country than liue there; for the rich would be against him, and the poore to please the rich would doe nothing but abuse him, some few might happily pitty his case, but they durst say naught. Eulalus. But what if his kingly maiesty appeared to them in his behauiour, words, gesture, counsells, wisedome, aduise, learning, &amp;c. they might easily see him to differ from ordinary and common men and to goe beyond themselues in all things, would they not reuerence him then thinke you, for all his meane estate? Mataeolog. They would euen doe as the Scripture saith in one place; when a rich man speakes, euery one must hold his tongue, and praise him, though he be a foole; but if a poore man speake, they say, what fellow is this? and if they get but any aduantage against him, they will euen hang him, if they could, such a saying there is; and euen so would they say to him. I may say it well enough, and doe them no wrong, for they haue neuer yet beene better; therefore King me heere, King me there, if the King were in such maner among them as you talke of, they would make him a subiect, I le vphold you for all his wisedome, counsell, &amp;c. for they scorne that any meane man should teach or controll them. Eulalus. But what if the King of Kings, Iesus Christ, should come downe from heauen in such appearance among them, as he was on earth in the state of his humiliation, and should deale plainely with them as hee did with his owne countrimen, Luke. 4. and with the Pharisees, Mat. 23. would they not be filled with wrath and indignation? would they not be ready to cling like Bees together, to make him weary of the towne? would they not seeke to intangle him in his own speeches? Mataeol. It is like enough that if hee once crosse them, they would deale badly enough, and haue little regard to his Sermons, they are so full of pride of heart and couetousnesse, as they would turne off euery thing with mocking and iesting, if otherwise they could not reuenge themselues of him. And I thinke there be too many such like euery where. Eulalus. How happeneth it that your Minister instructeth them no better, hee might reforme many abuses and disorders among you, if hee were diligent in preaching and applying the Word as hee ought to doe? Mataeolog. Our Minister is more diligent then hee neede to be: hee might take lesse paynes, and haue the more thankes. There hath beene more disquietnesse since his comming, then euer there was before, but hee gayneth naught by that; for I beleeue hee feeles the smart of it in his Tithes payment. His predecessor made a pretty liuing of it, because mens harts were more towards him: Againe, he was a good husband, and neither mak 't nor medled with any man, or his doings, as this man doth. And to tell you the truth, I my selfe( though he neuer harmed me) cannot fancy him, nor like of his doings. Eulalus. Why, what are his paynes; you spake euen now as though he were no husband. Mataeolog. His paines is a deale of lip-labour, all against himselfe; there is nothing but catechizing and preaching with him, if he hold on as he hath begun, hee will catechize all the good seruants out of the towne, he makes vs euen all weary of him. Youth must not play on the Saboth day, betweene Morning and Euening Prayer: old people must not meet together at the Ale-house to make merry, as they had wont to doe. A man must not doe any small Iobb, nor walke to other townes vpon businesses, nor make bargaines on the Saboth day, and I cannot tell what a hundreth such like prattles( it would make a horse breake his halter to heare all) but if all men were of my minde, we would giue him the hearing( seeing we cannot tell how to remedy it) but wee will doe as our fore-elders haue done before vs, as for him, we know not whence he came, nor what hee would haue: when hee hath made an end, let him doe it, &amp;c. Eulalus. You said euen now that he bred much disquietnes among you, tell me wherein he so naughtily behaueth himselfe, and I will talke with him: it may be I shall preuaile with him for a friends sake of mine that hath beene a Benefactor of his. Mataeolog. Faith, I cannot say that he is of a naughty behauiour; for he neuer sues nor troubles any man. For indeede the poore pay him all his due, because they dare not withstand him; neither doth he looke for more then his due, nor all that, as the report goeth: And as for the rich, he will not stand much with them( they are so froward) vnlesse they too grossely wrong him; and wrong him they will, doe what hee can, and I thinke in my conscience, that some counts it the best and cleerest gotten goods. But heere is the mischiefe, hee is too bold, and too indiscreet in his Catechizings and Sermons, he neuer keepes his teske, but is alwaies roauing into Townes-matters, and mens manners, that he hath nought to doe with: We are not so ignorant( as it pleases him to terme vs sometimes) but we can see when he leaues his teske. What is it for him to stand telling vs of such things as are not in the Scripture? We haue some in our towne that can read indifferently well marry, and are good sensible men, that can finde no such matter in the Bible: Wherefore we thinke that hee is too precise and curious. It comes surely of pride, that hee would haue all men ruled by him( and that our townes men know well enough) and that both his apparell and medling in high matters doth testifie; or it comes of malice, for hee hath no good neighbourhood in him: or of enuy, euen as other poore men grudge at, and enuy rich men: or of choller, for he will be angry oft times we know not for what, euen when no man hath wronged him. Well; he thinkes there is no man so good as himselfe, but I thinke there is none so bad as hee, and such like Putricans; but if hee cannot be content to read the Word of God to vs, and to trouble vs with no such bibble babble, some of our rich men will ouerpowre him and remoue him; hee had best to looke well to himselfe;( being among Scorpions,) you should be greatly his friend if you would adueruse him of these things, but in no case tell him, that I speake such things vnto you. Eulalus. I am sorry to heare you say that hee behaues himselfe so indiscreetly among you, especially in the worke of the ministery, doe you thinke that he speakes all of pride, enuy, malice, and choler? Mataeolog. He doth, he doth without doubt, euery man sees, and sayes that; for if hee would let them alone, they would let him alone, that 's a cleare case: for I haue heard many say so, and I fully beleeue it, I know it partly by my selfe. Heere is a fine man not farre off( you cannot but heare of him) a very good scholler, he is as perfect in his Greeke and Latine as in his English, it will doe one good to heare him, hee will goe from the Ale-house to the Church, and make as good a Sermon, and a better then our Minister can doe with all his weekes study: hee goes not an harebreadth from his teske, to meddle of any by-matters, as our minister doth. The common saying is true, the best Schollers are the least medlers: hee deales with nothing but with Gods word, and hee hath therefore the good will of all the parish, and wants nothing that they can doe for him. Eulalus. If they loue so to heare him, then they are a people of good knowledge; they surely know how to order their liues after the rule of Gods word; because he holdes himselfe so to the word of God, and meddles with nothing else. Mataeolog. Nay, I thinke they haue as little to say, as wee haue: Wee haue some talkatiue( but needy) fellowes in our parish that are able to put them all downe in reasoning, and I doubt the Minister to: but neither wee nor they care for them, they might guide their tongues, and keepe their friends if they were wise. Such poore men should mind their busines, and please their Masters, and not runne to Sermons, and busie their heads, they know not about what. We care for no such pratlers that will bee making themselues better then other men. But I know what I know, they that carry bookes in their pockets, carry the Deuill in their hearts. And to tell you the truth, wee care for none that followes or fauours our Minister: for there is no good neighbourhood, nor good fellowship in any of them. I thinke more than I will speake of, but what this world will come to, the Lord knowes. Eulalus. It should seeme by the drift of your speech, that you are in your parish, as they are in many more; one man is against another, and all against the Minister for his Preaching and Catechizing, as though Gods word were your common aduersary, euen as Herod was against Pilate, and Pilate against Herod, and all against Christ; or as Simeon and Leui brethren in iniquity. Mataeolog. What doe you compare vs to Herod, that killed S. Iohn Baptist ▪ to Pilate that condemned our blessed Sauiour? And is our Minister to be compared to Christ, to S. Iohn Baptist, or to any of the Apostles? Hee! What 's hee? No body, almost none of our substantiall men care for him, nor any that is wise, onely a few ignorant base fellowes fauour him. It is more for a dinner, or a pot of beere, then for any good deuotion they haue, more then others. Eulalus. Be not angry I pray you, I speake not of you, but of them that are such like. I take you to be my friend, and I hope neuer to giue you any iust cause to thinke hardly of me. I suppose that if Iohn Baptist, Paul, Peter, &amp;c. or any of the holy men in times past, were among you, in the appearance of an ordinary Minister( say, it were of your Minister) that you would reuerence him, suffer your selues to be instructed, and catechized with all readinesse and willingnes, acknowledge and confesse your sinnes, that you would be so farre from oppressing one another, as you would euen sell your possessions, and cast the money at his feete, as the Christians did at the Apostles feete, Act. 4 37. and that you would suffer your selues to be ruled and ordered in all things by his Sermons. Mataeologus. I truly, I thinke that I should euen doe so. Eulalus. Yea, and all your neighbours that your Minister so troubles and disquiets, with his indiscreet preaching. Mataeolog. I thinke they would I promise you, else wee were all euen as ill as Pilate, Herod and the Pharisees, as you said euen now. Eulalus. I thinke indeede you would bee all alike minded towards Iohn the Baptist, Paul, Peter &amp;c. For they would be quiet, not medling with your corruptions in your townes matters, nor of your euill manners that you complaine of; they would preach learnedly, in Latine, Greeke and Hebrew, and scholler-like, as that fine man doth which you told me of, that men might haue a comfort and delight to heare them, as you said of him; they would not raile against honest men, reprouing them for their couetousnesse, oppression, vsury ▪ bribery, enuy, lying, swearing, drunkennesse, adulteries &amp;c. but they would preach the Gospell, letting all such matters passe, doing their owne duties, and letting other men alone by them, as your fine man doth: they would keepe company, and goe from the Ale-house to the Pulpit: they would respect your rich men, and not doe as your Minister doth, which makes no difference between the poore and the rich: nor betweene chiefe-charge-bearers, and beggarly persons, and thinkes well of none, but such as fauour his Preaching and Catechizing. Mataeolog. I perceiue now, that all this while you haue mockt mee: you seeme to be a fauourer of those hypocrite Putricans, I le stand no longer talking with you. Eulalus. My purpose was not to mocke you, but to let you see how many men do sooth and flatter themselues in the bare title of a Christian, or of a Protestant( as the common Papist thinkes it enough to haue the bare name of a Catholike) being in the meane time so far from the knowlede of God and true Christianity, as they are indeed the vtter enemies of Christ and his members, and yet know not so much. This is the deepest hypocrisie of all, whereby a man blinds not others so much, as he deceiues his owne heart. As for your selfe, I perceiue that you are full of the darkenesse of this world; but if it shall please God to haue mercy on you, and to open the eies of your mind, you will be ashamed of this folly that you haue vttered to mee; though now you thinke that you haue well spoken, and the rather because you haue too many abettors in such ignorant Imaginations. As concerning your Minister, that you so contemptuously speake of; I haue knowne him long, and am well acquainted with him. I am sure, vnlesse you seeke occasion, and deuise matter against him, you cannot iustly taxe him for any enormity; whether it be for not obseruing the Canons, or any temporall, or Ecclesiasticall Law, or in regard of the faithfull, and conscionable discharge of his calling, as the Lawes of God and man enioyne him; or in regard of his life and conuersation. Whereas you say that he is more diligent then needeth, that is because you desire not the knowledge of God nor his waies. Your affections are set on the earth and earthly things: Therefore for feare of the Law you come to the Church, but for want of the Loue of God and his Word, you would soone be gone againe, to your drinking, gaming, iobs-doing, &amp;c. as the dog returnes to his vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the myre. Whereas you say, hee feeles the smart of it in his Tithes paying; this proceedes from your hatred of God, and of Iesus Christ, whose children you boast your selues to be, as the Pharisees boasted of God their Father, and of Abraham their Father. For by your owne confession it is meerely for his preaching, and catechizing sake, and also your good liking to your former idle Pastour, manifesteth the same. You haue Iewish and murtherous hearts by your owne confession, for you diminish his liuing by your cunning and crafty shifting; you would faine bring him into shame and obloquie, and make him a common by-word by your daily mistaking all his sayings, and doings. His Sermons you turne off with raging at euery thing that you thinke is spoken against you; or else with bitter mockings. Yea, you proceed so farre in your Iewish rebellion, as you can and dare, and as the bribe can giue you libertie. If the Lord had not bound your hands and feete with the chaines of good lawes and gouernment, it is like enough your ciuill substantiall men would throw him ouer the Pulpit, and stone him out at the townes end, as the Nazarens would haue throwne our Sauiour Christ downe headlong from a rocke, Luk. 4. Whereas you so much commend your former minister for his husbandrie, and nothing else; that 's your blindnesse, for the Scripture teacheth you otherwise. Our Sauiour saith, He that layeth his hand to the plough, and looketh backe, is vnapt for the kingdome of God. You are his husbandrie, hee is to worke vpon you, to plow vp the fallowes of your hearts, to destroy and kill the vnprofitable weedes of sinne and wickednesse in you, and to make your hearts a pure and cleane soule for the Gospell, that you might bring forth the fruit of holinesse, and righteousnes; that you glorifying God vpon earth, he might glorifie you in heauen eternally; and that hee also performing this duty which Christ( whose Steward hee is) hath layed vpon him, might shine as the starres in the firmament for euer and euer, by turning you from the waies of death and damnation, to righteousnesse and life. Whereas you call his paines a deale of lip-labour, and say hee will catechize all the good seruants out of the towne, and say that it would make a horse breake his halter to heare all his prittle-prattle: The Lord open your heart, that you many know what you say, and see in what miserable and fearefull estate you are. There is none of these things but you heare them proued &amp; confirmed plainly by the Scriptures, and many of them are the very words of the Text. How hath Satan blinded and bewitched you, that he causeth you to mock God to his face, euen as he would haue brought Iob to haue blasphemed him to his face? Iob. 1. 11. The Lord conuert you, and baptize you with the fire of his spirit, that you may be transformed into a member of Iesus Christ: for truely you show your selfe as yet to be but a limbe of the Deuill. What you are in Gods election, the Lord himselfe knowes, but if you neuer repent, you can neuer be saued. Whereas you say, you will giue him the hearing, because you cannot remedy it, but you will doe as you list; It would make any Christians heart bleed to heare you. For first you shew your cruell and reuengefull hearts( as the Iewes did to Stephen) in that you would haue a remedy, if Law would giue liberty, and like enough, so farre as it would permit: For the hatred of worldlings against Gods Ministers and children, is as a burning fire kindled by Sathan, and is like the vnquenchable fire of hell. Againe, whereas you would giue him the hearing, and make no more adoe, you shew your resolution in your obstinacie: your meaning is, that you would not contend too much with him; that you will come to the Church as late as you can, and when you are come, to while away the time in sleeping, or thinking on some earthly thing; and so let both him and the Sabaoth goe; for you thinke he cannot present you, and so long you care not. Againe, you say he breedes much disquietnes among you, through his bold and indiscreet Sermons: In that you thinke him too bold, that is the pride of your own harts, which thinke that he should be afraid of your faces, contrary to Gods commandement, Ier. 1. 18. Is not the Lord able with the breath of his mouth to blow you all in a moment into the riuer of fire &amp; brimstone, as he caused the west-winde to blow the grashoppers of Egypt into the red Sea? Alas seely wormes that creep on the earth, and sauor of nothing but the earth. Whereas you taxe him of indiscreetnes, that is your ignorance and indiscretion, that know not white from blacke. You say he keepes not his text: What, would you haue him to doe nothing but read ouer his text an houre together? You might iustly then make him a common by-word. No, but hee roaues into townes matters, and mens manners, that hee hath nought to doe with. Though he hath naught to doe with them, yet God hath to doe with them, that, I hope you will grant. But when your Preacher applies the Word to your towne in particular, and to the hearts and consciences of you and other men in particular, for your owne instruction and reformation, then you say, he goeth from his text. Hee meddles of such things as concerne him not. You can finde no such thing in the Bible: what is this but ignorance, and hardnesse of heart? you thinke because you finde not the name of your towne and townes-matters expressed word by word in the text, and because the houses and names and particular actions of such and such men are not according to euery circumstance at large expressed( as your grounds are butted and bounded in your leases) that therefore the text concernes not you, and consequently none, and so would you haue God to haue nought to doe with you, no more than you would haue to doe with him. You thinke enough for you to know what you would haue; but what he would haue you cannot abide to know. Yea, your spirits( though not your tongues) doe say, depart away from vs, wee will none of thy waies. And though you thinke, that you doe but speake and doe against your Minister: yet the truth is, that you fight like Giants against God and Christ, whom you call your Father and Redeemer; and not onely you, but Satan by you, who rides you at his pleasure. But you like the dumb horse, or mule, that haue none vnderstanding, know not whether you goe. And those Church-robbers that thinke their ministers tithes the best gotten goods, are the men that cast lots for Christs coate: for Christ is crucified, and his garment hath Lots cast for it till the worlds end.( I doubt this is a mystery to you.) Whereas you talke of precisenes, curiousnes, strictnes, and Putricans( as it pleaseth your ignorance to terme them) these and such like termes are but the froath of an euill and mocking heart, and the scumme of a corrupt iudgement, that knowes not what the Minister, or what Christian life meaneth. You your selfe thinke, that this precisenes, and too much busying of himselfe comes of pride, because he would haue all men ruled by him; whereas the trueth is,( and as his behauiour among you shewes it, vnlesse you be willfully, and starke blinde) that hee wholly and altogether setteth forth God vnto you, in his word, that you might be ruled by him, and that you,( as all men are) being by nature rebels against God, might be brought into subiection vnder him. And for this cause your minister doth abase himselfe, that making himselfe no body, God may be all, among you all, and in you all. And that his rule ouer you, your hearts, consciences, and liues might the more clearely appeare vnto you, and in you; that he might present you a chast and pure Virgin to Christ: arrogating nothing to himselfe, as Reualls and Antichrists doe, thereby obscuring Gods glory, but sending and deliuering you as it were into the hands of God, and Christ, that gathereth and clocketh you to himselfe, as the hen doth her chickins, by your minister. Wherefore euen as the Churle saith, Corne is too cheape, because he cannot get so much for it as hee would haue, but the poore finde it to be too deare: euen so your own hearts are prone, stubborne, and rebellious, not his, and therefore disdaine you to humble your selues to walke with your God, and intruding your selues into the roome of God, Antichristianlike, you as Sycophants doe in spirit say, that God is proud, which with the tongue, you as it were father vpon your Minister: being like the Libard, which for the hatred he beareth to man, teareth his image in peeces if hee finde it in paper, parchment, &amp;c. Did not Corah, Dathan, and Abiram rebell against God in the person of Moses? Did not the Israelites cast away God from ruling ouer them in the person of Samuel? 1 Sam. 8. 7. See, if euer any of the children of God spake this of the Prophets, that spake to them in the name of the Lord, whether Kings, Nobles, or Commons? But the rebells alwaies, not only Kings and Nobles, but euen the basest miscreants, tooke occasion at the person of the Prophet to despise and cast away the Word of the Lord, and to intreat his messengers despitefully, and as it seemes you doe, the Prophet which God hath sent amongst you, and to you. You smile at this particular application, that I call your Minister a Prophet of God, but let mee tell you this by the way, that prophane persons can heare the word of God in generall, I meane, so long as they vnderstand it not, and know not what vse to make of it; but when it comes to be applied in particular, they fal eyther to raging, or mocking, as Luk. 4. The Nazarens willingly heard our Sauiour Christ read his Text out of Esay, and after he had begun to expound the same, they cōmended him, &amp; wondred at his gracious words, but when hee began to reproue their vnbeleefe, and hardnes of heart,( which you call medling of townes matters, &amp; mens manners) they were filled with wrath, and went about to breake his necke:( They lookt for a temporall kingdome without them, and not a spirituall kingdome within them.) For these Nazarens boasted of Christ, and thought it a great honour to their country &amp; city, that a Prophet should arise from among them, that could preach such high doctrine, and worke such and so many great miracles; yea they imagined also that Christ should glory in their carnall gracing and honouring of him, as if for that end hee should preach and worke wonders: which thing his owne kinsman also imagined, Iohn 7. 3. 4. For flesh and bloud can goe no further. But when Christ comes to discouer their hypocriticall and carnall hearts, to reproue their infidelity, and that he will not carnally glorifie them, as they would carnally glorifie him. Iohn. 5. 44. then are they all in a rage, they will to their ability be reuenged of him, as it seemes you would be of your minister. Againe, if they fall not to raging, then they fall to mocking, as the couetous Pharisees mocke Christ Luke 16. 14. when they perceiued that he spake against them: and this is your deuice, by your owne confession, you would not striue much with your Minister( for want of power to do euill) but you will shew your hatred in your mocks, wrye lookes, priuy taunts, nips and girds, incouraging others against him, and bringing him and the Gospell into contempt, by all the slie meanes you could, so shall rude persons and abiects be actors of your wickednesse: but carry your selfe as politickely as you can, and couer your shame with heathenish ciuility, as well as you may( as now a daies many of you are become as cunning as stage-players,) yet you shall but dance in a net. You say hee preacheth of pride, why? because his apparell sheweth him to be proud. There may be, I hope, a proud heart in a leather doublet, like that of yours, and there may be a meeke spirit, and humble heart in a stuffe gowne like that of his; you looke on the outward appearance, but God lookes on both your hearts. His apparell is such as his calling requireth; and I know that for your cause also hee weareth such to take away offence, and contempt, you are so apt to stumble at euery straw; for such as you, iudge onely according to the outward appearance, and would take occasion at his meane apparell, to dispose the Gospell, as the Nazarens did. Mark. 6. 3. 4. and for this purpose the Church hath alwaies enioyned decency in apparell to Ministers. You say, hee preacheth of malice, because he hath no good neighbourhood in him, because hee goes not to the Ale-house with you, and your hang-byes, haile-fellowes well met, to drinke and to game, and to preach ouer the pot( you would then heare him, with great deuotion, and not say he preached prittle-prattle) therefore he hath no good neighbourhood in him. If you knew what good neighbourhood were, you should see none in any of you, so much as in him. Mataeo. Why, what call you good neighbourhood. Eulalus. The Apostle tells you in Ephes. 5. 12. submit your selues one to another in the feare of God. If your fellowship and friendship be knit in God, it is good fellowship: If your feasting and meetings be as they were in the Primitiue Church among Christians, vsing your selues as in the presence of God, there is good fellowship and neighbourhood. If you be affectioned to loue one another with brotherly loue, and in giuing honour one going before another, that is good neighbourhood, Rom. 12. 10. If your rich men prey not on the poore, by rent-racking, by small measures and great prizes, but releeue them before they fall, and helpe them vp when they are fallen, Luk. 10. 33. 34 35. then are you good neighbours. But if your good neighbour-hood be acted no where but at the Ale-house, in drinking and drunkennesse, ribaldry and swearing, in foolish iangling, rotten and vnsauory speeches. In dissembling, lying, cousonage in bargayning, insnarings( called ale-house bargaines) wasting your good, like Esaus: then is it such like as S. Peter speakes of, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4. It 's like the meeting of swine at their trough; and it seemes strange to such heathenish people, that good Christians run not with them to the same excesse of riot, and therefore speake they euill of them. You say also that he preacheth out of choler, and that hee will be angry when no man hurts him. You thinke belike, no man should be angry for Gods cause; you will take your brothers part, your kinsmans part, and your friends part, when you see him abused: yea, in his absence, you will answer for him, it may be you will not deale onely words, but blowes for him, if you loue him well, and should God haue no friends to take his part, not to speake a word for him, nay, not so much as to looke with an angry countenance against his enemies. Hath not God beene, and is not God our friend that wee should shew no loue at all to him? can a childe with patience see his Father wronged? and should the children of God not be displeased when they heare the name of God blasphemed? Surely if we loue our Fathers that begat vs, wee cannot but loue God much more which hath made both them and vs, and all the world, and maintaines vs all, and all for vs, of his own goodnes and bounty. If we loue our earthly Mothers, that endured some bodily paines in our birth, we cannot but loue Iesus Christ, that endured the cursed death of the Crosse. For our new birth; Our Mothers bring vs forth Children of wrath; firebrands of hell, but Christ hath brought vs forth children of God, and heyres of his glorious kingdome. Surely this loue of God towards vs, which is infinite, and endlesse, should moue vs to loue him; at the least, to be displeased with his enemies, and the contemners of him. Was not Moses angry with the Israelites in Gods cause? Exodus 32. 19. Did not the Leuites out of their zeale of Gods glory slay euery man his brother, companion, and neighbour? Was not Lots righteous soule grieued from day to day, because of the wickednesse of the Sodomites? but you say, a man is angry for nought, if it be in Gods cause, you shew, what knowledge, what faith, what loue of God there is in you. This is farre from louing him with all the heart, soule, minde, and strength. There is none so ready to answere for themselues as you are, yea, you will be very feruent and zealous in your owne causes: but you will hate or mocke them, that speake in Gods behalfe. Whether doe you loue God, or your selfe better? whereas you say, that some of your rich men will ouer power him, and remoue him, vnlesse he looke well to himselfe; he knowes that to be the nature of the rich, which serue the golden Deuill Mammon, to hate all them that seeke to set forth Gods glory. Hee knowes that Mammon is now strong in the world, and so full of sophistry, that hee can make the Law a nose of waxe, yea, and the Gospell also, to turne them which way he list. Notwithstanding he feares not the souldiers and seruants of Mammon, though they come like Goliahs, strong men, sensible men, sound cardes, well purst, cunning vnderminers against him; for God hath put a stone in his sling, euen his word in his mouth, and giuen him strength to slay a Beare, and a Lion. God hath bidden him not to feare you: wherefore should hee feare? Ezech. 2. 6. Sonne of man feare them not, nor be afraid of their words, although Rebells and thornes be with thee, and thou remainest with scorpions: feare not their words, nor be afraid at their lookes, for they are a rebellious house. Wherefore I would counsell you to looke well to your selfe, that Satan and your owne sins ouer-power not you, and remoue you cleane out of Gods fauour, protection, and kingdome. Afterward, you come to tell me of a fine man, of a great Scholler, that vseth more Greeke and Latine then English in his Sermons, and that it will doe one good to heare him. What edifying doe you thinke that any of his vnlearned hearers get by such vsing of his Greeke and Latine? You your selfe say that they profit nothing in knowledge, and I thinke they profit as little in good life. What good is that you speake of? It is euen nothing but this, that you vse him, as an instrument to disgrace your Minister withall, by your odious comparisons-making. And because heereby you comfort, releeue, and refresh an accusing conscience, whiles that you dispose the plain-dealing of your owne Minister, and accounts him the right Preacher, that lets you liue securely in your sinnes. Moreouer, doe you thinke it a decent thing for a Minister to goe from the pot to the pulpit? Should he not rather come from God, I meane from prayer, and Meditation, that he might pray and preach in fear, humility, reuerence, and zeale, as hauing the word put in his mouth from God, and speaking as from God, beeing in the glorious presence of God and his Angells? You say that you haue talkatiue fellows in your parish, that can put them all downe in reasoning, and their minister too. It likes you well, and such as you, to call gracious words talkatiuenesse, and prattle. Marke what the Apostle saith, Colossians 3. 16. Let the word of God dwell plenteously in you, in all wisedome, &amp;c. In another place, Let your speech be seasoned with salt; but you thinke that vaine, foolish, rotten, and vnsauory speeches, should rather be plentifull in men mouthes; for with these I neuer heare you finde any fault, oaths, lyes, foolish ieasting, ribaldry hath free passage without checke, or rebuke. And if such persons doe but humour and please you, then is all well, taken how bad soeuer it be, and with such like persons you loue to keepe company; but you haue no delight to tarry where there is sober talke, and Christian communication; as I haue seene diuers begin to hem, and to hum, and to hang downe the head, to yawne, raspe, and stretch( as being weary with long sitting) saying that they haue businesse, and therefore must away, and so sliuing out of the doores, presently stumble into an other place, where they will be as merry as cuppe and cann can make them. But heare what the holy man of God, the Prophet Dauid saith, Psal. 26. 4. 5. I haue not dwelt with vaine persons, neither will I haue fellowship with the deceitfull. I haue hated the congregation of the wicked ▪ and will not sit among the vngodly, And Psal. 119. 115. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keepe the commandement of my God. And Pro. 14. 7. Depart from the foolish man, when thou perceiuest not in him the lips of knowledge. And Ecclus. 9. 17. Let thy talke be with the wise, and all thy communication in the Law of the most high. This is expresly commanded, Deut. 11. 19. We must speake of the Commandements continually, when wee sit at home, when wee walke by the way, when wee rise vp, and when we lye downe: but they that do thus, by your confession, shall lose their friends; if they lose their friendship of sinners, to obtaine the friendship of God, and his Angells, it is a gainefull losse, for there be more with them then against them. Whereas you say( a wonted Prouerbe among prophane people) A booke in the Pocket, a Deuill in the heart; There be some that carry no bookes in their pockets, nor yet good words in their mouthes, which notwithstanding haue the Deuill in their hearts. All are not bad that carry good bookes with them, nor all good, that haue no bookes. It is a Prouerbe among you, hee that doth as the Preacher would haue him doe, shall die a beggar: but there be some which dye beggars, because they will not doe as the Preacher would haue them. And I my selfe haue heard some say, bring not vp your sonne in learning, for it will make him a bad husband; but there be some bad husbands that were neuer brought vp in learning. You call your honest men needy, in way of contempt. It is as easie for the rich man to scorne the poore for his pouerty, as it is for the fat Oxe that is ready for the shambles to tread the feeble vnder feete. The holy man Dauid was pestered, and pushed at with such fat Bulls of Basan, Psal. 22. 12. and bark't at with such dogs, verse 16. so was Christ also, whereof he was a figure; and so are, and shall all Christians, especially the poore, that can least helpe themselues Marke well, what our Sauiour Christ saith, It is as hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdome of Heauen, as for a gable rope to passe through the eye of a needle: The temptations of Mammon preuaile so much with them, as that they cannot subiect their hearts to the Gospell; they will not haue Iesus Christ to be King and ruler ouer them, like the murtherous Husbandmen in the Gospell, they cannot abide to do homage to Christ; such manner of seruice is too base, with the proud and licentious worldlings. It will not afford such meat, drinke, and cloth, as a man should haue, and there is no liberty but continuall paines-taking. Lewd seruants that take no pleasure in their Masters profit, nor delight in a well ordered family, loue to serue dissolute and prodigall masters, where they may haue great wages to maintaine pride, wantonnes, and gaming, and where they may haue full scope and liberty to say and doe what they list: Euen so, most rich men, and all worldlings, haue no pleasure at all in the profiting of Christ by their faithfull seruice, neither haue any delight in his gouernment and family, there is so much strictnesse ▪ curiousnesse and base work; but they must serue golden Mammon, that will giue them wage enough, they shall want nothing that will doe them good, for there is neither pinching nor sparing, neither shall they be restrained of their liberty. Now seeing that these worldlings are such bad and froward seruants, Christ which is a straight and hard man, and therefore lookes to haue his businesse well followed, and to receiue his owne with aduantage, will haue those that haue not dwelt in wanton and prodigall houses, where there is nothing but eating and drinking, mirth and pastime; but hee hath chosen the poore and needy to confound the rich; the foolish and simple, to confound the wise and the learned; the weake, and helplesse, to bring to naught the mighty and the strong, 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28. This Scripture is fulfilled in your owne eyes, in your owne towne, and yet you cannot see it, because he lookes on the heart, and hath mercy on whom he will, and you contrarily looke on the outward appearance, and iudge thereafter. In Marke 6. Christ preacheth in his owne country, and worketh miracles there also, but how do they heare him and receiue him? Whence hath he this doctrine? What wisedome is this that is giuen him? How doth hee worke such great wonders? Is hee not a carpenter? are not his Mother, Brethren ▪ and Sisters with vs? But heere was all, and therefore Christ maruelled at their vnbeleefe. In the weake and meane outward appearance of Christ, they might the more clearely haue seene the power, wisedome, and glory of God, had they not beheld him with fleshly and carnall eyes. So may you see the mercy, grace, and goodnes of God in opening the eyes of your poore men, tradesmen, labouring men, vnlearned men, men of no education, of no meanes, such as the Disciples were; not so sensible and so wise as some of your rich men are, not booke-learned as they are, not at leysure as they are, but alwaies in some labour and trauell, and yet can they put downe all your sensible men in reasoning, and your fine Latine Preacher with them. Is not this the power of God inlightning their mindes, mollifying their hearts with the oyle of grace, and sanctifying the word vnto them which they heare? Heereupon comes this difference betweene them, and the rich, and betweene other poore men and them. They hunger and thirst after the word of God, therefore God satisfieth their soules with God, and they are fatte and well-liking, the rich haue not this spirituall hungar, and thirst, and therfore they are sent empty away. Luk. 1. 53. These poore men among you( whom God hath receiued to mercy) you call pratling fellowes, beggarly persons, Putricans, with other mocking, vngodly, and enuious termes. Our Sauiour Christs countrimen admired his doctrine, wisedome, miracles, but euer in the end they came in with their( But:) He is but a Carpenter, but of meane parentage, but of meane education, &amp;c. Euen so doe you come in alwaies with your But: but hee is no Scholler, but he is no linguist, but our rich men and great men regard him not; hee is but this, he is but that: so you make this But, a stumbling blocke, or rather a brazen wall to separate you from Gods Kingdome. The Lord turne your hearts. Againe, you say such poore men should mind their businesse, and not runne to Sermons: this running to Sermons indeede is a great beame in your eyes: you commonly iudge them vnthrifts, that spend an houre in the weeke day at a Sermon: but you neuer speake of them that spend many houres in the weeke in idle talke, or at the Ale-house ▪ Nay I haue heard your owne tongue commend a trades-man, for his orderly course of life; and among other things, that hee would goe twise or thrise in the weeke to the Ale-house; if hee liked the company; but he duely kept his stint, hee would not passe his houre vnlesse by great chance. Neither doe I simply disallow this thing in him; but if he bestowed one of these houres in the hearing of a Sermon, I should thinke the better of him, and so would you to. For I am perswaded that you your selfe thinke the Church better than the Ale-house, and the word of God to be as needfull for the soule, as Ale for the body. And if they offer not the sacrifice of fooles, but giue diligent eare, and laying vp that in memory which they heare, shall afterward vpon occasion speak of the same, I hope that you for your part will not terme them pratlers, nor hate them for it, but rather commend them, and loue them, preferring them before others that haue that care to know God, nor desire to heare his word. Alasse, I am sorry to heare you say, that you care for none that followes, and fauors your Minister. You should all fauour him, and follow his doctrine: yea, and him also, wherein hee followeth Christ. You should be his fellow-helpers, and gather with him, and not scatter abroad, nor hinder the worke of the Lord in his hands. You rich men should countenance him all that you can, that thereby all sorts, and euen the worst people might be moued to reuerence him, which in the contempt of him, contemne the word of God, and God himselfe, whose messenger he is. They should couer his faults, and infirmities, that by such things the word of God be not euill spoken of among them that seeke such occasions. They should helpe and releeue his wants( as all true Christians euer haue done,) that pouerty hinder not the worke of the Ministery and so your soules be starued, and famished to death through the pining of his body. You will meate your oxen, and keepe your horses well, that they may be strong to labour, else your businesse will lye vndone: ought you not then much more to maintaine your minister, that your soules may be filled, and satisfied with good? Will you withdraw meat from your beasts, that they might not worke, and yet would haue your worke done? surely you would thinke him hardly well in his wits, that would doe so: euen so, will you sacrilegiously withdraw your Ministers maintenance, that he might not preach, and yet would be saued, this is spirituall madnes, and dead drunkennesse. Alas for you, I pitty your case, I perceiue how the gods of this world, Satan and Mammon, haue blinded the eyes of some of your rich men, and hath preuailed so much with them, as he hath brought them to be ranke Pharisees, as ill and worse then they, that persecuted Christ. Some few of them, it should seeme, being fat at the heart, and full in the purse, are prickt with pride and vaineglory, whereby they seeke to ouer ▪ power all the meaner sort, to prey vpon them at their command, both to say and doe, not what truth and right is, but what they would haue. If any submit themselues and yeeld to them in all things, magnifying and praising them, him they will countenance and fauour and chiefly giue him faire words; but all accompts in the end being cast, he shall finde himselfe nothing helped, or bettered by them, vnlesse it be of other mens cost; but if any dislike their doings and crosse them sometimes, yea, when he can doe no other, vnlesse hee will burthen his conscience, him they will be reuenged of, disgracing him, and watching opportunity to thwart him; and as I may say, to worrie him if they could. And by those meanes haue they brought, and seeke to bring all men into their subiection, whereout they suck no small aduantage. Now these men cannot abide your minister for his plaine dealing with them, yea like enuious Riualls they cannot abide that any respect or reuerence should be had, or giuen to him, for they thinke it great disgrace to them, that any man should be preferred before them in any thing in your parish; yea they make accompt of your minister, but as of a bodily seruant for outward Church ▪ duties, according to Law, and that therefore they pay his tithes as his wages. They would not haue him to meddle or make with townes-matters, which are swayd after their owne lusts, nor of their wickednesse, because they would not haue their vglinesse and shame vncouered before the eyes of the world, nor the gnawing worme of their galled conscience stirred and set on worke before the time,( the Lord conuert them if it be his gracious pleasure.) Hence it is that they seeke to single out all men from him, that being left alone, and no man daring to speak in his behalse, no not the manifest trueth, they might vpon euery light occasion vse him at their pleasure: but though all men leaue him, yet God will assist him, in his owne cause; and in the end all men shall see his power in the conuersion, or in the confusion of these wicked Caitiues. Mataeolog. It is euen as true, that you say, as God is in heauen. They are so fed as they are like a foole with a full belly, and a bable in his hand. No man can bee in quiet for them: they are euen the most venemous people that euer man came amongst; it is not possible to escape their hands, but they will one way or other mischiefe him: I haue had but too much experience of— &amp;c. Eulalus. How bad soeuer they be, let not vs be moued to impatience, but vse good words; If wee see their wickednesse, let vs hate it, but let vs loue their persons, God can make them vessels of holinesse and righteousnesse at his pleasure. A soft answere pacifieth wrath, and good words quench the coales of strife: we must not cease to be good because they are euill. But to make an end of my former speech vnto you; If you remember, you were angry with me( when vpon your owne speeches) I said you were like to Pilate and Herod, one against another, and all against your Minister; doe you not euen now say the same vpon another occasion) terming them venemous, and full fooles with bables? Whereby it appeares that you are now with them, now against them; faine would you haue their fauour, but your owne will withall; but your loue to Gods word, and your minister is like theirs. Well, I perceiue that sinne raignes in a company of you, and that Satan rules you at his pleasure. When you and they are at some variance, and the Minister, as his text doth lead him, doth reproue some sinne that you know them guilty of, that sinne you remember well, and will be rehearsing of it, and curri-fauouring with the Minister, to shroud your selfe vnder him: this you doe out of a reuengefull heart to disgrace and defame your neighbours, and that in making others bad, your selfe might seeme good. Again, when time serues, you will side to them against your minister, and call his reprouing of sinne rayling against honest men, and say that he hath no neighbourhood, nor loue of his people in him; that hee speakes all out of pride, malice, enuy, choller: Whereby a man may easily see, that some among you are religious, some prophane and vnmoueable in their wickednesse, some crafty shifters, seruing themselues of both parties, hating the one, and not louing the other. What say you now, being in this tune that you are in? Put the case that Iohn the Baptist, or Paul, or Peter, &amp;c. or any of the holy men of ▪ former times, should come to Preach among you: put the case that Iesus Christ himselfe should come,( I meane not working miracles, nor discouering themselues) but preaching, and teaching in such manner as they did to the Iewes, &amp; to other peoples, when they liued on earth? You say you would heare them, follow them, reuerence, and honour them, confesse your sinnes, you would spend goods, body, and life for them, you would cast all that you had at their feete, and suffer your selues to But the manifest trueth is, that Christ himselfe should finde no better entertainment, than your Minister now doth, nay farre worse; for Christ vsed to speake to the spirits of men, seeing hee knew the thoughts of their hearts, and their secret sinnes; and therefore would you persecute him with more deadly hatred. Hee would not preach comfort I warrant you to obstinate and hard hearted Pharisees, nor frame his speeches to the liking of their corrupt iudgments, and earthly imaginations, as you would haue your Minister to doe. But you will say hee would be innocent, harmelesse, sinnelesse, giuing none occasion, no appearance of euill, yea, hee would stoppe the mouthes of the worst, that they could not speake one euill word of him. But by your leaue, that is well spoken which is well taken, and that is well done, that is well construed. If you be of froward dispositions, and euill harts, how would you take that at his hands, which were contrary to you? how would you being of ignorant and corrupt iudgements interpret his words, and censure his doings? It mattereth not onely who is the speaker, and what is spoken; but also who is the hearer, and how it is heard. The serpent can finde poison there where the Bee can finde no poyson but honey. And I haue often heard them say that the cunning Alchymist can draw gall out of hony, and hony out of gall: you must therefore consider what heart and eares you haue: I tell you plainely, that vnlesse Christ should put new hearts into your bodies, you would heare him no otherwise then you doe your owne Minister, that cannot giue you new hearts. And though hee be most holy, yet would you esteeme him a sinner. What I pray you said the proud and couetous Pharisees of him? Hee is a glutton, a drinker, a common companion. Matthew 11 19. A deceiuer, Matthew 27. 63. A Sorcerer, or worker with euill Spirits, Matthew 9. 34. Hee hath a Deuill, and is madde, why doe you heare him? Iohn 10 20. Hee is a Samaritane, and is frantike, Iohn 8. 48. They know that hee is a sinner, Iohn 9. 24. yea, his owne kinsmen layed hands on him, supposing that hee was madde. Mark. 3. 21. How then I pray you would the proud, couetous Pharisees in these daies receiue him? How would prophane mockers heare him? Euen worse then they doe your Minister, or any other faithfull Pastor elsewhere. For the more purely that the word of God is preached, the more doth it dissent from the corrupt heart, and more neerely searcheth it, and makes sinners more sinfull, working more forcibly in the conscience. Heereupon the rebellious sinner presently seekes for false releefes, ease, and comforts, and that is by returning all vpon the Minister, hee is a Puritane, hee is phantasticall, precise, indiscreete, vncharitable; now he speakes to himselfe, for wee are no such men; hee speakes out of pride, malice, enuy, choller, false information, there 's none worse then himselfe, such Christianity cannot be acted &amp;c. How I pray you, did they censure Iohn the Baptist? Hee hath a Deuill, the Deuill is in him, a grimme dogge, a melancholy fellow, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, &amp;c. How then would you speake of him, and of Christ? If new wine be poured into olde vessells, whosoeuer poures it in, and howsoeuer it be poured in, the vessels will burst. And if a new peece be sewed to an old garment, how good soeuer the peece be, and how cunning soeuer the taylor be, it will rent away part of the olde: for the olde vessell cannot containe the new wine, nor the olde rotten garment retaine the new cloath. If the pure word of God from Christs owne mouth were applied to your olde, fleshly, and rotten hearts, what containing or retaining would there be of it? Againe, so long as you are carnall, how can you iudge of those things which are spirituall? The naturall man cannot perceiue the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse to him, nothing sounds well to his eare, but that which sauours of flesh and bloud. And therefore many dainty eared men can away with none but with schollerlike Sermons. The Word must sauor of humane wisedome and learning, else there is no more taste in it, than in water, hee cannot abide to drinke it; but if it hath sugar in it ▪ or be mixt with wine, then for the sugar and wines sake, hee drinks it off, and commends it not simply, but secundum quid. But the pure word of God hath neither good taste, nor good farewell, it goeth downe either like water in the sottish, or like wormewood and gall in the hard-hearted and malitious. Iudge now I pray you, how your froward rich men would heare, receiue, entertaine, and welcome Iesus Christ, in whom they say they beleeue, whom they loue aboue all, and by whom they hope to bee saued. I feare that they which so greatly commend your fine man, that preacheth more Greeke, Latine, and Hebrew, then English, and which are so delighted and comforted with his languages, if Iesus Christ were preaching to them, in such manner as hee did on the earth, would hardly giue him friendly intertainement, they would hardly all agree to make him a stipend, or contribution, I doubt some would giue him neuer a penny, euen of them that are the most able. Mataeolog. I am no Scripture man: I cannot answer you to euery thing: but it will not sinke into my head, but that we should all heare and obey Christ. Though wee be bad enough( as there is none good but God) yet wee are not so bad, I trust, whatsoeuer you say, I hope you are no Prophet, it is hard for you to iudge what wee are, much lesse can you tell what you would be. Eulalus. I perceiue well that you are no Scripture man; for it appeares by you, that that gift is not yet giuen to you, neither doe you as yet desire it. For it may be that you are afraid to be termed a Puritane, or to be mocked of your friends &amp; companions, and you loue not to be mocked. Whereas you say that I am no Prophet: It is enough for me that you are a Prophet in these things. For I haue said nothing but that which you haue said, and I build vpon your reason, and common reason. You said euen now that if a Lion were turned into a Lambe, hee would be but regarded and vsed like a Lambe. Euen so, when God tooke our nature, euen mans true shape vnto him, was hee not regarded and vsed as a man in the world? Yea, and was hee not more despitefully and shamefully intreated in the world, then euer any man was before him? What if hee were in the same appearance now in the world, as then hee was, should hee haue any better entertainment in the world then his brethren haue now, and haue had? They that know not ▪ his members.( 1 Corinthians 1. 15. which discerne all things, and are iudged of none:) How should they know the head, if hee were among them? Surely he that knoweth the head, knoweth the members also, and hee that knowes not the members knowes not the head, for they are all one. Heb. 2. 11. You saide also, that if a man were forth twenty yeares in a strange countrey, and should returne home againe in the forme of a seruant or poore man, that his owne family would not know him: Euen so Saint Iohn speakes of Christ, Iohn 1. 10. Hee came among his owne, and his owne receiued him not. If they had knowne him in Moses and the Prophets, they would surely haue receiued him, as some beleeuers did. So if you know him not now in his Word preached, you could not possibly know him if hee were among you: for you can no way know him but by his voyce. You said moreouer that if a King should come into your towne in the forme of a seruant, or poore man, that hee would not be heard nor regarded at all, though hee shewed forth himselfe in his countenance, gesture, behauiour, wisedome, counsell, aduise, learning, &amp;c. Euen so though Christ was the brightnesse of the glory of God, and the liuely Image and patterne of his person in the world, the maiesty, power, greatnesse, wisedome, and goodnesse of his God head shining in his person, face, countenance, words, workes; yet his owne knew him not. And if hee were in such sort among you, neither would you know him nor heare him otherwise then now you know him, and heare him by his voyce; if he begin once to meddle with you, and to reforme you, then you would not let him alone. Why? because hee will not let you alone, as you said of your Minister. Alas for you I pitty you, because you cannot see your owne hypocrisie that you might repent. There was a certaine Bishop, that at a visitation preached a very godly Sermon, and godlily, euen to the capacity of the meanest hearers. I heard him very greatly commended for his graue gesture, for his distinct and sober deliuerie, for his Fatherly instructions, speaking plainely and familiarly as a Father to his Children, not so earnest and vehement, and hotte, as young nouices are, &amp;c. And hee was worthy to be a Bishop. As for their Minister, hee was but a youngling, and as good as no body in comparison of him. If they had such a Preacher, they would giue I know not what( for these gaue little, or nothing towards the maintenance of their owne) This great and generall commendation was signified to the Bishop in priuate, &amp;c. Now at the next yearely visitation after, the same Bishop came in the attyre and fashion of an ordinary and poore minister, hauing his beard shauen, &amp;c. offering himselfe to bee their Preacher, for there was a speech in the towne that their owne Preacher would goe away to another place. The Bishop of set purpose did choose another text differing from his former in words, but not in matter, so that in a manner he preached the very same Sermon. Now the same persons that did so much commend him before, did as muh discommend him now, and that in mine owne hearing. They said that hee had no good gesture, but a heauy kinde of moouing of his body, that hee bended too much forward, and stood not vpright, that hee was nothing ripe, nor ready in his deliuery, that hee could be no scholler, because hee was so plaine spoken, that almost any man might make as good a Sermon, that it differed little from ordinary talke, that hee enforst, nor followed his exhortations with no vehemencie, nor earnestnesse, and that his words had no life in them, to stirre vp attention, or to mooue the affections of the hearers, that none of them would giue a penny towards his maintainance, and that they would haue an other kinde of Preacher than hee, or they would haue none. Euen so if Iesus Christ should come to preach among you in mans appearance, you conceit your selfe that you would heare him as Christ, but withall; you haue a secret confused imagination of some kinde of worldlie flourish, as the Iewes conceiued of him: but the plaine trueth is, that you would say and iudge no otherwise of him, then of any other faithfull pastour: for you commend you know not what, and you dispraise you know not what. But now to trouble you no longer, let mee counsell and exhort you, as a friend, and Christian brother, cast away all these vaine and worldly Imaginations, pray vnto God to enlighten the eyes of your minde, that the glorious light of the Gospell might shine vnto you, which as yet is hidden from you, pray vnto him to take the stony heart out of your body, and to giue you an heart of flesh, a penitent, humble, and sober heart, leaue that foolish ieasting, and that vaine Ale house company keeping, betake your selfe to priuate prayer, and reading, and then GOD will heare you, and come vnto you, for hee will not turne away his face from them that desire to be acquainted with him, giue diligent eare to your Ministers Sermons and Catechizings, and meditate seriously after of that which you haue heard and offer your selfe to your Pastour and Shepheard of your soule, be not strange vnto him, as though you cared not for him, but let him see your amendment and conuersion, and be better acquainted with him, but yet in singlenes and sincerity, and if you once be entred into a good way, bee constant in it to the end without feare, or wauering, let nothing terrifie or affright you; whatsoeuer men iudge, say, or doe, care not you for that, nor be troubled, be ruled by the aduice of your minister, before any other, and let your foote weare his threashold, for you shall finde more comfort, pleasure, and delight in his company than euer you had in any thing all the daies of your vanitie, yea, you shall more and more perceiue in what a most miserable estate you were in, and those rebels your rich gluttons are in, vnlesse they repent: You shall by Gods grace in time come to a more cleare, and perfect discerning of all things. You know the olde Prouerbe commonly vsed, they that are in Hell thinke there is no other Heauen, and the Oxe thinkes hee is going to the stall, when hee goes to the shambles. Bee not deceiued: The men of this world, which you doe call wise sensible men, are ledde by their sense, and worldly craft to the Deuills Larder-house. And as the Apostle sayes, when they thinke themselues to be wise, they become very fooles. I haue spoken thus boldly vnto you, because I take you to be my friend; for I am sure that I am yours: if you any way doubt of it, try mee in any thing wherein I can pleasure you; onely let mee intreat you to consider well of this point that you and I haue thus reasoned of. I haue a good hope that howsoeuer you haue beene misledde a long time, all the Angells in Heauen shall reioyce in your conuersion. And I doe like you a great deale the better, because you haue not left mee, and gone away from mee in a chase, especiallie being that I haue dealt so plainely with you as I haue done. Mataeolog. I can tell you, if you had spoken so to some of our towne, they would sit on your skirts while they liued. Eulalus. Like enough: for it is the property of flesh and bloud to be reuengefull, but the Apostle teacheth vs another lesson: Auenge not your selues, I will repay saith the Lord: My skirts are as well able to beare a Feather, as it is to sit on them; I trust that so long as I giue them no other occasion then I haue done, they shall haue no fast sitting, for the Lord will not leaue them that feare him, in their enemies hands. The Lord grant that I may see some fruits of this conference in you at our next meeting. By this short Dialogue it appeareth how the word of GOD is most commonly and generally heard and receiued,, yea, euen of all, that are not sanctified: For they doe either altogether heare it as the word of man, or at least when it is particularly applied, for their conuersion, and reformation, then begin they euer to seeke out arguments( for the Sophister the Father of lyes is at hand) for their hard hearts, for their lustfull liuing, for the saluing of an euill and corrupt conscience, drawne from the person of the Minister; yea, and to seeke out another shepheard,( some that Satan hath pickt in at the window) whom they may obiect against him: who if hee be a good Scholler, politicke and crafty for his owne aduantage, and of Gentleman-like fashion, then is hee, and such like to be preferred before their owne Minister, and such like, without all compare. And indeede, to say the truth, there is no more comparison betweene them, then betweene Paul, and the learned preachers, that so flourisht at Corinth. A foole will seeke out excuses for his foolishnes. Wherefore seeing that this is the fourth and highest degree of Faith, whereby a man euen steps vp into heauen, the Apostle, and all faithfull Shepheards, haue great cause of reioycing( as the Angells in Heauen also haue) and of thanksgiuing without ceasing, when any man heareth the word, not as theirs, but as Gods, seeing that they alone, and none but they doe heare, know, and follow Christ their chiefe shepheard. This then is the condemnation of the world, that they heare indeede, but with vnbeleeuing hearts, doubting, and wauering minds, and in a dreaming and slumbering manner, being like to Salomons sluggard, Prouerbs 6. 10. Yet a little sleepe, a little slumber, a little foulding of the hands to sleepe; the weather is colde, there is a Beare, or a Lyon in the way; It is yet early enough, there is no time yet ouerpast: many labour and trauell, hauing no rest night nor day, yet doe they liue and die in pouerty; many lye and sleepe, yet wealth commeth on them vnlooked for: That which will be, will be: It is but euen happen good, haue good, one good fortune or other will befall mee. I shall doe as well as I can, and as others haue done before mee. And thus doth slothfulnesse get the vpper hand, and hold possession still, till at the length pouerty come sodenly, and necessity like an armed man. This is the common practise of dead hearted, and worldly minded men, they are continually called vpon, iogged, and rouzed, yet they heare, and heare not; like dreamers, and are possest with the spirit of slumber. Their hearts are fixed, and affections set on the earth and earthly things, euen as the tree is fixed, and rooted in the earth. They loue to lye and liue securely in sinne, being drunken with the profits, pleasures, delights, pompe and pride of this world, hauing no affection nor fancy to God and godly things, being adulterers, adulteresses, and fornicators of this world, altogether vnlike and contrary to the spouse of Christ in the Canticles. Hence it is, that they imagine and reason in themselues like the sluggard; yet a little more pleasure in sinne, a little more solace and delight in fleshly lusts, a little longer space of liuing after the pleasant conceits and imaginations of mine owne heart, there is yet no time ouer-past, I shall repent and amend in my latter dayes, God is mercifull, and will not so strictly deale with vs as these precise Preachers doe beare vs in hand, that would haue vs to be ruled and ordered by their phantasticall imaginations: they would haue they know not what, and for ought we see; they are as ill as others. This precise kinde of preaching is come vp but of late yeares, and I thinke there were as good Christians before, as euer there haue beene since. These and a thousand such like follies doe they imagine and vtter, tending all to the blinding and hardning of themselues in their sinfull and rebellious courses. That which a man hath a speciall loue, liking, and inclination to of himselfe, hee may soone be perswaded vnto by another, for any reason, though neuer so weake and seely feedeth him, and confirmeth him; whereas the strongest disswasions that may be shall preuaile little or nothing, or but for the time present: Againe, on the contrary, if a man out of his owne heart and iudgement haue no liking nor inclination, though hee be neuer so earnestly set vpon, and by most sound and strong reasons be disswaded by another; yet can hee be little moued or stirred, but euer returneth backe againe to his former dislikes, like the heauy stone, that being rouled by great strength vpward, doth of it selfe retire backe againe, so soone as we hold off our hands. Thus it is with obstinate sinners, whose hearts are heauy, and stony, the strongest reasons that may be though neuer so plaine and euident, yea the very bare word of the text, being the immediate word of God, can preuaile little or nothing with them, they are so strongly possest with contrary imaginations, lusts and desires: but on the contrary, any weake, silly and foolish reason, any ignorant speech &amp; groundlesse opinion feedeth them, and confirmeth them in their sinfull courses. Any thing will perswade the sluggard to be idle; so any thing will mooue the sinner to spirituall idlenesse: And thus will those drunken and sleepy sinners doe, till death summon them to iudgement, and till the house be fired ouer their heads, and round about them, I meane till the elements melt, and the heauens passe away with a noise, as our Sauiour Christ saith, Matthew 24. 38. 39. As in the dayes before the flood, they did eate and drinke, marry, and giue in marriage, vnto the day that Noah entred into the Arke, and knew nothing( for they little regarded, and lesse beleeued Noahs preaching) till the flood came, and tooke them all away; so shall the comming of the Sonne of Man be. Therefore it is no marueile if men commonly cast away the word of God preached, as but the word of man; but it is a marueile rather that men should heare it as the word of God, taking no offence at the person of the Preacher: for this proceedeth of supernaturall grace, but the other comes of naturall blindnesse and corruption. Great cause therefore haue we to reioyce and giue thankes to God for them, that receiue the Word from vs, not as our word, but as the Word of GOD; which is an euident token of true conuersion. In this manner of receiuing the word hee confirmeth them, by auouching that the word preached is indeed the word of Gods own mouth: By which briefe asseueration, hee preuenteth and cutteth off all obiections. Furthermore hee amplifieth this their manner of receiuing the word, by the efficacy of the word in them[ which worketh in you:] The word of man worketh on the naturall affections, and moueth them but to that, to which they haue an inclination in themselues: but the word of God worketh in man by regenerating and sanctifying him, that denying himselfe hee might be transplanted into Christ, and bring forth fruit in him, to the honor of God, not to the profit of himselfe, which no naturall man can doe. Philosophy and morall education instructeth and ordereth the life and manners, by restraining the brutishnesse of sinne, but it changeth not a man from being a bruit. Heerein then is the euident difference betweene Gods word, and humane doctrines, and instructions. This working of the word he restraineth to the beleeuers[ in you,] without faith we are dead in trespasses and sinnes, Ephes. 2. 1. And our Sauiour Christ saith, The time shall come, and now is, when the dead( sinners) shall heare the voice of the Sonne of God, and they that hear it( with humble, penitent, and obedient hearts) shall liue. Also the Apostle saith, Ephes. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleepest( in worldly and fleshly affections, &amp; lusts) and stand vp from the dead, and Christ shall giue thee light. Now the dead receiue no nourishment ▪ therefore neither they that want faith, as the Apostle saith, Heb. 4. 2. The word which they heard, profited them not, because it was not mingled with faith in them that heard it. In the 14 verse following, hee prooueth that the word of God wrought in them by the outward worke or effect,[ For ye are become followers of the Churches of Iudaea in Christ: For you haue suffered the same things of your owne countrimen, as they haue of the Iewes. This, is a sure and euident argument of true hearing and beleeuing, to immitate the godly, and to haue fellowship and communion with them. Further, this fellowship and imitation is proued and tryed by the fire, namely by their suffering with them, this suffering is further tryed by the persons persecuting[ their owne countrimen, friends, kinsfolkes, &amp;c.] for that is the greatest persecution of all, and which can least be endured, wherefore it trieth a Christian man euen to the heart. FINIS. 1 Cor. 3. 5. 6. Phil. 4. 1. Act. 20. 26. 27. 2 Cor. 2. 15. Gal. 4. 11. Rom. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Iames 2. 16. Acts 8. 21. Acts 5. 3. 2 Tim. 4. 10. Iohn 8. 13. Marke 6. 2. 1 Sam. 8. 7. Ier. 43 2. 3. Acts 5. 28. Acts 24. 5. Iohn 9. 28. Iohn 6. Iohn 9. Vide Triumphū Papalem, Hasenmulleri. 1539. Acts 20. 37. Iohn 7. 12. Luke 4. Math. 23. Luke 4. Iob. 1. 11. Ierem. 1. 18. 1 Sam. 8. 7. Luke 4 ▪ Iohn ▪ 7. 3. 4. Iohn 5. 44. Luke 16. 14. Ephes. 5. 12. Rom. 12. 10. Luke. 10. 33. 34. 35. 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4. Exod. 32. 19. Ezech 2. 6. Psal. 26. 4. 5. Psal. 119. 115. Prou. 14. 7. Ecclus. 9. 17. Deut. 11. 19. Phil. 22. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28. Marke 6. Luke 1. 53. Mat. 11. 19. Mat. 27. 63. Mat. 9. 34. Iohn 10. 20. Iohn 8. 48. Iohn 9. a. Marke 3. 21. 1 Cor. 1. 15. Heb. 2. 11. Iohn 2. 10. Prou. 6. 10. Mat. 24. 38. 39. Ephes. 2. 1. Ephes. 5. 14. Heb. 4. 2.A true discourse of all the Sallyes which the Soldiers of the Citie of Graue haue made since the siedge: And in what manner the Admirant, with a great Hoast of Horse and Foote, with dyuers Waggons laden with Ladders, Powder, Shot, and other necessaries of reliefe, came to relieue the Citye, the 22. of August, Stilo Nouo in the night: But was( by Gods Prouidence, and his Excellencyes valour) driuen backe, and forced( in the night) to fire his owne Tents, and to take a shamefull flight. Translated according to the Copie, Printed at Delfe, by Jacob Cornelison Uenn●l. LONDON. Printed for William Ferbrand, and are to be solde at his shop in Popes-head Alley, ouer against the Tauerne doore, neere the Royall Exchange. 1602. A true discourse of all the Sallyes which the Soldiers of the City of Graue haue made since the Siedge: and in what manner the Admirant with a great Hoast of horse and foote, with diuers waggons laden with ladders, powder, shot, and other necessaries of reliefe, came to relieue the Citty, the 20. of August, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in the night: But was by Gods prouidence and his Excellencyes valour, dryuen backe, and forced in the night to fire his owne Tents, and to take a shamefull flight. AFter that his Excellency Prince Maurice of Nassaw, had trayned his whole Army through Brabant, and lastly laide siedge to the stronge City of Graue: at his first arriuall, hee busied his Soldiers, in continuall raysing of his Trenches, as well for his defence against the sallyes which might be made out of the Citty, as also to preuent the incursion of the Arch-dukes Campe: the which hee knew was very stronge, &amp; would very shortly attempt the Cityes rescue, which indéede so fell out, for that in a very short time, the Admirant of Aragon, with the Archdukes Army, was heard to be marching thetherward: yet by the carefull diligence of his Excellency, and his Commaunders, the whole Campe was so strongely fortifyed, and walled about with déep Trenches, that the Admirant comming thether, and perceiuing that there was but small hope left, of making any breach through his excellencyes Trenches: Pitched his whole Army lesse then a halfe houres going from our Campe, lying within sight thereof, without any aparant signes of the least attempt. His Princely Excellency with his whole Regiment, lyeth on the other side of the Mase, neere Kuycke: the Lord Count William, with his Forces lyeth on the side of the Heath: and Sir Frances Veare with his English Forces, lyeth on the higher side, on the side of the riuer Mase: the other Regiments are placed accordingly, in such order, and maintained with so gallant Martiall gouernement, as it doth ones heart good that beholdes it: their Watches and Centinels so warily and carefully ordered, that they seeme a common wealth: Also, many valiant and resolute enterprises are performed, euen vnder the Citty walles. The Cittizens perceiuing the Archdukes Campe to be néere hand, and trusting to be by their approach, better furthered and relieued, then afterwardes they found themselues, beganne to shewe themselues somewhat bolder then before, by diuers signes of brauerie, and some sallyes in the night vpon our Campe, howbeit to their losse, for that they still lost more( by far) then we did, which is contrary to common chaunce, where the Sallyes of Citties( which they neuer proffer but vpon espyed aduantage) happen for the most part to the dammage and losse of the besiedgers. Before the enemies approach, the Cittizens kept themselues very quiet, and now hoping of rescue, they made sundry fires in the Citty to the Campe: the which out of the Archdukes Campe were answered with the like signes, without that ought else haue ensued therof. In the enemies Campe there is great want of victuals, by reason whereof, many Italians come ouer into his Excellencies Campe. The 18. of August there came aboue foure score Italians into our Campe, some of them were whole Corporalships, with all their weapons and furniture: His Excellency vsing them very kindly, victuals them, and to euery man he giueth a Gilden in money, with a Pasport to returne into Italy: with them hee sendes a messenger to aduise the States, that where they passe, they should be victualled, and so sent forwards. At the same time the Cittizens made a salley vpon our Trenches, but being preuented and not daring to come on any farther then their owne counterscarpe, it is not knowne whether they lost any men or no. The 19. of August, there came againe into his Excellencyes quarter, aboue 150. of the enemyes reuolted Soldiers, most of them Italians, some of them with their weapons and furniture, and othersome without: they were all well vsed and each man giuen a Gilden in money, and so shipt away. The 20. of August, there came ouer to our Campe, a Horse-man with his horse, and al his whole furniture, with two Horse-men without their horses: also two Spaniards which would receiue no Pasport, but wold remaine in his Excellencies seruice. The 21 of August, there was a Jesuite or Seminary Priest taken prisoner, and carryed into his Excellencyes quarter: also certaine reuolted Italians came to our Campe this day. At the same time there were brought nine prisoners which were taken in the skirmish néer vnto the Sconce which his Excellencie tooke from the enemy at his first comming before the Citty, being on the other side of the Mase. In this Sconce( whilst the enemy helde it) there was but a Corpes de Guarde, but it is now a stronge three square Sconce: howbeit, there is no Ordinance thereon, but onely one great murderer, which casteth balles of fire-worke into the Citty: also, they shoote great péeces of blewe square stone, and other great stones out of it: of such bignes, that a man( with all his power &amp; strength) is but able to lift one of them. These stones( making way wheresoeuer they fal) breaking through Churches and houses, the people doe cry very pittifully, when the said peece is shot off, which can easily be heard out of the said Sconce. The balles of fire which they shoote, are filled with Musket-shot, and doe lye still on the ground, about halfe a quarter of an houre before they worke: and then the flame is séene aboue al the houses of the Citty, insomuch( for as much as can be perceiued, and is most apparant and likely of truth) those of the Citty, doe more feare these fire balles and these great stones, which are shot out of the sayd Sconce, then all the rest of his Excellencies great Ordynance, which he hath in foure batteryes. Betwéene the 21. and 22. of August, the enemy attempted to put about 2000. men into the Citty, together with 400. horse, furnishing them al with ladders, deale-boords, shouels, pickaxes, and other instrumentes, to breake in vpon the Redu●s or Courts of Guarde that lay betweene the quarters of his Excellency &amp; Count William, but hauing intelligence that his Excellency was ●irring vp and downe with 4000. Horse-men and many foote, they resyred back, leauing their waggons whereon their abouesaid Instrumentes were laden: some ladders were( that night) brought into his Excellencyes Tent. The same night there was taken a horsemans boy, who was found swimming from the Citty, and was carryed before his Excellency, but they could gather nothing by him, because he shewed himselfe as if he had béen drunk or simple: and the selfe same night, the vttermost Centinels at the case side were at a bickering to-together, wherein two of the townsmen were slaine. Our Soldiers doe d●ly get many faire horses and prisoners: also three horse-mens boyes got nine fayre horses of the 〈◊〉. The 22 of August, those of the City issued out twice vpon their Coun●●●scarpes, but it cannot bee knowne whether any of them were slaine or not: for our part,( praise vnto God) we lost none. This day our Horsemen tooke another Jesuite Prisoner. Betweene Thursday and Fryday in the night, being betweene the 22. and 23. of August, the enemy set fire on all his Tents and Cabbins, which did so flame, as if the whole Country had béen on fire, and ther withall, breaking vp his Campe, he went away very quietly without any noyse: next day were found many waggons with weapons and furniture, besides many sicke men, the which his Excellencie caused to be carryed away, vpon his owne costes and charges. The enemy tooke his way vpwards alongst the Mase: and his Excellency followed him with 1200. horse, and some foote: but being that the 23. day of August, there was a very thick mist, he lost the enemy, not knowing which way hee was gone. In the quarter of his Excellency the spéech was, that he was gone toward Rhynebercke. After in the Mase were found many dead bodyes driuing with the streame, as also many armes and legges that were shotten off. Extract of a Letter, written by a man of worship out of Nimingem, the fist of September, to his friend in London. WOrshipfull Sir, it was reported heere by some, that Sir Frances Ueare, being in a skirmish before the Graue( shot through the head) should haue dyed neere vnto Dor●b: howbeit, in the Campe was no certain●ye thereof, and was since said onely to be but hurt in the ●ck. Also, Captaine Meetkerek was deadly wounded. The quarter and Regiment belonging vnto Sir Frances Veare in this Siedge, is giuen vnto Prince Henry of Nassaw his Excellencyes yongest brother. The enemy lyeth betweene Uerb &amp; Ruremond, seeking by all meanes to assure those two towns with stronger Garrisons: but the townes would as fayne keepe them out, and enjoy a newtrall freedome: the approaches of the siedge goe daily forward; his Princely Excellency intending, not any more to put his Soldiers to the aduenture of any assaults, but endeuours to win the towne with Myning,( a costly and new winning of townes) for the towne is very stronge, and the shot doth but little harme vpon the walle. From this towne we can both heare the report, and see the smoake of the Artillery. In the Campe is good hope that it will be shortly recouered: I shal peraduenture take occasion to goe see the Campe, in company of others, that from hence doe dayly resort thether, both men, women and children, for the Campe is wonderfully well stored of victuals and other necessaries: hauing been there, I will as then relate further vnto you the true estate of all, as neere as I shall be able to collect them. Vntill which time I commit you to God. By letters of the 29. of August, according to our computation, there is certaine newes, that Sir Frances Veare was yet liuing, &amp; on the mending hand; howbeit his hurt was very sore and daungerous. Your louing friend E. D.NEVVES from Graues-end: Sent to Nobody. Nec Quidquam nec Cuiquam. LONDON Printed by T.C. for Thomas Archer, and are to be solde at the long Shop vnder S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1604 TEE EPISTLE Dedicatory. To Him, that( in the despite and neuer-dying-dishonour of all empty sisted Mecaen-Asses) is the Gratious, munificent, and golden. Rewarder of Rimes: singular pay-maister of Songes and Sonnets: Vnsquint-eyde Surueyor of Heroicall Poems: Chiefe Rent-gatherer of Poets and Musitians: And the most valiant Confounder of their desperate debts. And to the comfort of all honest Christians) The now-onely-onely-Supper-maker to Enghles &amp; Plaiers-Boyes, Syr Nicolas Nemo, alias Nobody. SHall I creepe( like a drownde Ratte) into thy warme bosome,( my Benefique Patron!) with a piece of some olde mustie Sentence in my mouth, stolne out of Lycosthenes Apothegmes, and so accost thee? Out vpon t! the fashion of such Dedications is more stale than kissing. No, no, suffer me( good Nobody) to diue( like a White-Friars Puncke) into thy familiar &amp; solid acquaintance at the first dash: And in stead of Worshipfull Syr, come vpon thee with honest Iew, how doest? Wonder not that out of the whole barrell of pickeld Patrons, I haue onely made choice of thee, for I loue none really, but thee and my selfe, for vs two do I only care, and therefore I coniure thee, let the payment of thine affection be reciprocall. They are Rimes that I have boyld in my leaden Inckpot, for thine owne eating: And now( rarest Nobody) taste the reason why they are serued vp to thee( in the taile of the Plague) like Caveare, or a dish of Anchoues after supper. Know then( Monnsier verse-gilder) that I haue failed( during this storme of the Pestilence) round about the vast Iland of the whole world, which when I found to be made like a foote-ball, the best thing in it, being but a bladder of mans life,( lost with a litle pricke) I tooke vp my foote and spurnd at it, bicause I haue heard that none but fooles make account of the world. But mistake me not,( thou Spur-royall of the Muses!) for it was neither in Sir Francis Drakes nor in Candishes voyage, that I swom through so much salt-water: But onely with two honest Card-makers Peter Plamius and Gerard Mercator) who in their vniuersall Maps,( as in a Barbers Looking-glasse, where a nomber of most villanous vngodly faces are seene, in a yeare, and especially now at Christmas) did( like Country-fellowes, that is to say very plainly) and in a shorter time, than a Sculler can rowe from Queene-hyue to Wapping, make a braue discouery vnto me, as well of all the old raine-beaten, as of the spicke and span new-found worlds, with euery particular Kingdome, Dukedome, and Popedome in their liuely cullors, so that I knew Constantinople as perfectly, as Iobbin, the Mault-mans horse of Enfield knowes the way to London: and could haue gone to the great Turkes Serraglio( where he keepes all his wenches) as tollerably and farre more welcome, than if I had beene one of his Eunuches. Prester Iohn, and the Sophy, were neuer out of mine eye,( yet my sight was not a pin the worse). The Soldan of Egipt I had with a wet finger: from whence, I trauailed as boldly to the Courts of all the Kings in Christendome, as if I had bin an Embassadour) his pomp only excepted.) Strange fashions did I pick( like wormes) out of the fingers of euery Nation, a number of phantastick Popin-Iayes and Apes( with faces like men) itching till they had got them. And( besides fashions) many wonders worthy to be hung vp( like Shields with senseles, bald, impraesaes) in the white paper-gallery of a large Chronicle. But this made me fret out worse than gumd Taffaty, that neither in any one of those Kingdomes,( no nor yet within the walls and water-works of mine own country) could I either find or heare,( for I gaue a Crier a King-Harry-groate to make an oyes) no nor read of any man, woman or child, left so wel by their friends, or that caryed such an honest mind to the Common-wealth of the Castalians, as to keepe open-house for the seauen poore Liberall Sciences: nor once( which euen the rich cubs and fox-furd curmudgens do) make thē good cheere so much as at Christmas, whē euery cobler has licence( vnder the broad Seale of Hospitality) to sit cheeke by iowle at the table of a very Aldermans deputy. What woodcocks then are these seauen wise maisters to answere to that worme-eaten name of Liberall, seeing it has vndone them? It 's a name of the old fashion: It came vp with the old Religion, and went down with the new. Liberality has bin a Gentleman of a good house, and an ancient house, but now that old house( like the Players old Hall at Dowgate) is falne to decay, and to repaire it, requires too much cost. My seauen lattin-sellers, haue bin liberall so long to others, that now they haue not a rag( or almost nothing but rags) left for themselues: Yea and into such pitifull predicaments are they fallen, that most of our Gentry( besides the Punyes of Innes of Court and Chancery) takes them for the Seauen Deadly Sinnes, and hate him worse than they hate whores. How much happier had it bin for them, to haue changed their copies, &amp; trō Sciences bin bound to good Occupations, cōsidering that one London-occupier( dealing vprightly with all men) puts vp more in a weeke, than seuen Bachilers of Art( that euery day goe barely a wooing to them) do in a yeare. Hath not the Plague( incomparable Nobody: and therefore incomparable, bicause with an Aeneas-like glory, thou hast redeemed the golden-tree of Poesie, euen out of the hellish scorne, that this worlde( out of her Luciferan pride) hopes to dam it with) hath it not I say done all men knights seruice in working the downfal of our greatest &amp; greediest beggers? Dieite Io Paean, You yong Sophisticall Fry of the Vniuersities! breake Priscians pate( if hee crosse you) for ioy: for had not the Plague stuck to you in this case, fixe of your seuen Academicall sweet-hearts( if I saide all seuen I should not lye vpon them) had long ere this( but that some Doctors withstood it) bene begd,( not for Wards, yet some of them haue lodged I can tell you in the knights Warde) but for meere Stones, and Chesters, Fooles, Fooles, and Iesters, because whereas some of their Chymicall &amp; Alchymicall raw disciples haue learnt( at their hands) to distill gold and siluer out of very Tauerne-bushes, old greazy knaues of Diamonds, the dust of bowling Allyes, yea &amp; like Aesops Gallus Gallinaceus, to scrape precious stones euen out of dung-hils, yet they themselues( poore harletries) had neuer the grace, nor the face, to cary one peny in their own purses. But to speak truth( my noble curer of the poeticall madnesse for nothing) where should they haue it? Let them be sent into the courts of Princes, there they are so lordly, that( vnles they were bigger &amp; taller of their hands, than so many of the Guard) euery one lookes ouer thē, of it they giue him any thing, it 's nothing but good lookes. As for the Citie, that 's so full of Crafts-men, there is no dealing with their misteries: the nine Muses stand in a brown study, whē they come within their liberties, like so many mad wenches takē in a watch &amp; broght before a bench of Brown bils. O Ciues, Ciues! quaerenda pecunia primum! Virtus post Nummos: First open your purses, and then be vertuous, part not with a peny: the rich mizers holde their owne by this Canon lawe. And for those( whom in English we call poore snakes) Alas! they are barde( by the Statute against Beggers) from giuing a dandiprat or a Bawbee. In the Campe there is nothing to be had but blowes and Prouant: for souldiers had neuer worse doings: My sweet Captain, bestowes his pipe of rich Trynidado( taking the Muses for Irish Chimny-sweepers) and that 's his Talent. Being in this melancholy contemplation, and hauing wept a whole ynck-horne full of Verses in bewailing the miseries of the time, on the suddaine I started vp: with my teeth bit my writings, because I would eate my words: condemnd my pen-knife to the cutting of powder-beefe and brewes: my paper to the drying and inflaming of Tobacco: and my Retirements to a more Gentleman-like recreation, viz. Duke Humphres walke in Powles: swearing fiue or sixe poeticall furious oathes, that the Goose-quill should neuer more gull me, to make me shoote paper-bullets into any Stationers shop, or to serue vnder the weather-beaten colours of Apollo, seeing his pay was no better. Yet remembring what a notable good fellow thou wert: the onely Atlas that supports the Olympian honour of learning: and( out of thy horne of Abundance) a continuall Benefactor to all Schollers( Thou matchlesse Nobody!) I set vp my rest, and vowde to consecrate all my blotting-papers onely to thee: And not content to dignifie thee with that loue and honor of my selfe: I sommond all the Rymesters, Play-patchers, Iig-makers, Ballad-mongers, &amp; Pamphlet-stitchers( being the yeomanry of the Company) together with all those whom Theocrytus calls the Muses Byrds( being the Maisters and head-Wardens) and before them all made an ●ncomiasticall Oration in praise of Nobody,( scilicet your proper selfe) pronouncing them Asses, and threatning to haue them prest to serue at sea in the ship of Fooles, if euer hereafter, they taught their lynes( like water-Spaniels) to fetch any thing that were throwne out for thē, or to diue into the vnworthy commendations of Lucius Apuleius, or any Golden-Asle of them all, being for their paines clapt only on the shoulder, and sent away dropping, when as thy leatherne bagges stand more open than Seacoale sackes more bounteously to reward them. I had no sooner cut out thy vertues in these large cantles, but all the Synagogue of Scribes gaue a Pla●dite, crying out Viua voce, with one loud throat, that All their verses should henceforth haue more feete, and take longer strides than if they went vpon stilttes, onely to carry thy glorious praises ouer the earth: And that none( but Nobody) should licke the fat of their Inuentions: that Dukes, Earles, Lordes and Ladies, should haue their Il-liberal names torn out of those bookes whose Authors they sent away with a Flea in their eare, And the stile of Nobody in Capitall Romane Letters, brauely Printed in their places. Herevpon crowding their heads together, and amongst thēselues canuasing more &amp; more thy inexplicable worth, All of them( as inspirde) burst suddenly forth, and sung extemporall Odes in thine honor, &amp; Palynodes in recanta iō of all former good opinions held of niggardly patrons: One of them magnifying thee, for that in this pestiferous shipwrack of Londoners, when the Pilot, Boteswaines, Maister and Maisters-mates, with all the chiefe Mariners that had charge in this goodly Argozy of gouernment, leapt from the sterne, strooke all the sailes from the maine yard to the mizzen; neuer lookt to the Compasse, neuer fownded in places of danger, nor so much as put out their Close-fights, when they saw a most cruel man of warre pursue them, but suffred all to sinke or swim, crying out onely, Put your trust in God my Bullies, &amp; not in vs, whilst they either hid them selues vnder hatches, or else scrambled to shoare in Cock-boats: yet thou( vndanted Nobody) then, euen then, didst stand stoutly to thy tackling, step coragiously to the helme, and manfully runne vp &amp; downe, encouraging those( with comfortable words) whose hearts laie coldly in their bellies. Another lifted thee vp aboue the third Heauen, for playing the Constable part so rarely: And( not as your commō Constables, charging poore sick wretches, that had neither meate nor mony, in the kings name to keepe their houses, that 's to say, to famish &amp; die: But discharging whole baskets full of victualls( like vollies of shot) in at their windowes: thou, onely thou( most charitable Nobody, madest them as fat as butter, &amp; preseruedst their liues. A third extold thy martiall discipline, in appointing Ambushes of Surgeons and Apothecaries, to lye close in euery ward, of purpose to cut of any cōuoy that broght the plague succor. A fourth swore at the next Impressiō of the Chronicles, to haue thy name, with the yeare of our Lord &amp; certain Hexameter verses under-neath) all in great goldē letters, wherin thy Fame should be consecrated to eternall memory, for carefully purchasing conuenient plots of ground, onlie for Burialls( and those out of the Citie too, as they did in Ierusalem) to the intent, that threescore( contrary to an Act of common Councell against In-mates might not be pestred together, in one litle hole, where they lie and rot: but that a poore man might for his mony haue elbow-roome, &amp; not haue his guts thrust out to be eaten vp with paltry worms: least when in hot and drie Sommers( that are yet not dreamed on) those mustie bodies putrifying, the inavoydable stench of their strong breath be smelt out by the Sun, and then there 's new worke for Clarkes and Sextons. Thus had euery one a flirt at thy praises: if thou hadst bene begde to haue plaid an Anatomy in Barber-surgions Hall, thy good parts could not haue bene more curiosly ript vp: they diu'de into the very bowels of thy hartie commendations. So that I, that( like a Match) scarce gaue fire before, to the dankish powder of their apprehensions, was now burnt vp my self, in the flames of a more ardent affection towards thee, kindled by them. For presently the court brake vp, and( without a quarter-dinner) all parted: their heads being great with childe, and aking very pittifully, till they were deliuered of Hymnes, Hexasticons, Paeans, and such other Panegyricall stuffe, which euery one thought 7. yeare till he had brought forth, to testifie the loue that he bore to Nobody: In aduancement of whose honour( and this was sworne vpon a pen &amp; ynck-horne in stead of a sword, yet they al write Tam marti quàm mercurio, but how lawfully let the Heralds haue an eye too t) they vowd &amp; swore very terribly, to sacrifice the very liues of their inuention; And whē they wanted ynck( as many of them do wanting mony) or had no more( like a Chancery-man) but one pen in all the world, parcell of their oath was, to write with their blood and a broome-stick before they would sit idle. Accept therefore( for hansell-sake) these curtall Rymes of ours( thou Capon-feaster of schollers:) I call thē News frō Graues-end: Be it knowne vnto thy Non-residence, that I come not neare that Graues-end( which takes his beginning in Kent) by twenty miles at least; but the end of those Graues do I shoote at, which were cast vp here in London, to stand as land-marks for euery parish, to teach them how far they were to goe: laying down( so wel as I can) the maner how death &amp; his army of pestilent Archers, entred the field, and how euery arrow that they drew, did almost cleaue a heart in sunder. Reade ouer but one leafe( deare Nobody) &amp; thou purst vpō me an armor of proofe against the rankling teeth of those mad dogs( cald Booke-biters) that run barking vp and downe Powles Church-yard, and bite the Muses by the shinnes Commend thou my labours, and I will labour onely to commend thee: for thy humor being pleasd, all the mewing Critists in the world shall not fright me. I know the Stationers will wish me and my papers burnt( like hereticks) at the Crosse, if thou doest( now) but enter into their Shops by my meanes: It would fret their hearts to see thee at their Stalls reading my Newes. Yet therein they deale doubly, and like notable dissemblers, for all the time of this Plaguy Allarum, they marcht only vnder thy cullors: desirde none but thy company ▪ none but thy selle wert welcome to them: none but Nobody( as they all cride out the thine immortall commendatious) bought bookes of them: Nobody was their best, and most bounteous customer. Fye on this hollow-hearted world! Do they shake thee off now? Be wise, and come not neere them by twelue-score at least, so shalt thou not neede to care what disgraces they shoote at thee. But leauing them to their old tune, of What new Bookes do you lack? prick vp thine eares like a March-Hare( at the sudden cry of a kennell of hounds) and listen what newes the Post that 's come from Winchester- Terme windes out of his horne. O that thou hadst taken a lease there( happy Nobody) but for one moneth, the place had( for thy sake) bin well spoken of for euer. Many did heartily pray( especially Watermen, and Players, besides the Drawers, Tapsters, Butchers, and Inholders, with all the rest of the hungry Cominaltie of Westminster) for thy going thither. Ten thousand in London swore to feast their neighbors with nothing but plum-porredge, and mince-pyes all Christmas,( that now for anger will not bestow a crust on a begger) vpon condition that all the Iudges, Sergeants, Barristers, and Atturnies, had not set a foot out of dores, but that thou only( in pomp)( sauing them that labour) hadst rode the iourney, so greedily did they thirst after thy preferment. For hadst thou bin there, those black-buckrom tragedies had neuer bin seene, that there haue bin acted. Alas! its a beastly thing to report. But( truth must out) poore dumb Horses were made meere Iades, being vsed to villanouslie, that they durst neither weihy nor wag taile. And though the riders of them had growne neuer so chollerick, and chaft till they foamd againe, an Hostler to walke them was not to be had for loue or money. Neither could the Geldings( euen of Gentlemen) get leaue( for all they swet til they dropt again) to stand as they had wont at Rack &amp; Manger.( no, no, t was enough for their maisters to haue that honor) but now( a-against all equitie) were they cald( when they little thought of any such matter) to a deere reckoning for all their old wilde-oates. A cōspiracy there was amōgst all the Inkeepers, that Iack Straw( an ancient rebell) should choak al the horses: and the better to bring this to passe, a bottle of hay was sold deerer then a bottle of wine at London. A trusse cost more, then maister Maiors trusse of Forduch, with the sleeues &amp; belly-piece all of bare Sattin to boote: Which knauery being smelt out, the horsemen grew pollitick, &amp; neuer sate downe to dinner, but their Nags were still at their elbowes: so that it grew to be as ordinary a question, to aske, What shall I pay for a Chamber for my selfe and my Gelding all night,( because they would not be Iaded any more) as in other countrey townes, For my wife and my selfe, for a beast and a man were entertained both alike, and that in such wonderful sort, that thei le speake of it, In aeternam rei memoriam. For most of their roomes were fairely built( out of the ground, but not out of the durt) like Irish Houels, hung round about with cobweb-lawne very richly, and furnished, no Aldermans Parlor in London like them: for here 's your bed, there a stable, and that a hogsty, yet so artificially contriu'd, that they stand all vnder one roofe, to the amazement of all that behold them. But what a childishnes is it, to get vp thus vpon their Hobby-horses, let them bite a the bridle, whilst we haue about with the men. As for the women, they may laugh and lye downe, it s a merry world with them, but some-body payes for it. O Winchester! much mutton hast thou to answer for, which thou hast made away( being sluttishly fryed out in steakes, or in burnt Carbonadoes) thy maid-seruants best know how, if they were cald to an account. It was happy for some, that 4. of the Returnes were cut off, for if they had held together, many a one had neuer returned from thence his owne man. Oh beware! your Winchester-Goose is tenne times more dangerous to surfet vpon, than your S. Nicholas Shambles-Capon. You talke of a Plague in London, &amp; red Crosses set vpon dores, but ten plagues cannot melt so many crosses of siluer out of Lawyers purses, as the Winchesterians( with a hey-pas, re-pas) iugled out of theirs to put into their owne. Patient they were I must needes confesse, for they would pocket vp any thing, came it neuer so wrongfully, insomuch that very good substantiall householders haue oftentimes gone away with crackt crownes, &amp; neuer cōplaind of thē that gaue thē. If euer mony were currant( à currēdo, of rūning away) now was the time, it ran frō the poore clients to the Atturneys &amp; Clarks of bands in small troopes( here 10 &amp; there 20) but when the Leaguers of Winchester cried Charge, Charge, the Lawyers paid for t, they went to the pot full deerely, &amp; the townesmen still caryed away all the noble and royall victories. So that being puft vp with an opinion, that the Siluer Age was crept into the world againe, they denyed( in a manner) the Kings Coyne, for a penny was no money with them. Whensoeuer there shall come forth a Prest for Souldiers, thither let it be sent, for by all the opinion of the best Captaines( that had a charge there, and haue tryed them) the men of Winchester are the onely seruiceable men this day in England: the reason is, they care no more to venture among small shots, than to be at the discharging of so many Cannes of beere: Tush, us their desire, to see those that enter vpon them, to come off soundly, that when they are gone, all the world may beare witnes they came to their cost. And being thus( night and day) imploid, and continually entring into Action, it makes them haue mightie stomacks, so that they are able to soake and deuoure all that come in their way: A Rapier and a Cloake haue bin eaten vp at a Supper as cleane( and caryed away well too) as if they had bin but two Rabbet-suckers. A Nag serued but one Seruing-man to a breakefast, whilst the Saddle and Bridle were brewd into a quart of strong Beere. This intollerable destroying of victuals being lookt into, the Inhabitants laid their heads together, and agreed among themselues( for the general good of the whole Towne) to make it a towne of Garrison. And seeing the desperate Termers, that stroue in lawe together, in such a pittifull pickle, and euery day so durty, that when they met their Councell, they lookt like the black Guard, fighting with the Innes of Court, that therefore all the Householders should turne Turke, and be victuallers to the Camp. By this meanes hauing the lawe in their owne hands, they rulde the roast how they listed: insomuch, that a common iugge of double Beere skornd to kisse the lips of a Knight vnder a groate. Sixe howres sleepe could not be bought vnder fiue shillings. Yea in some places a nights lodging was dearer than the hire of a Curtizan in Venice twice so long. And( hauing learnd the tricks of London-Sextons) there they laid foure or fiue in a bed, as here, those other knaues of Spades thrust nine and tenne into one graue. Beds keeping such a iustling of one another in euery roome, that in the day time the lodgings lookt like so many Vpholsters Shops, and in the night time like the Sauoy, or S. Thomas Hospitall. At which, if any guest did but once bite his lip, or grumble, he was cashierd the company for a mutinous fellow, the place was not for him, let him trudge. A number stood with Petitions readie to giue mony for the reuersion of it: for Winchester now durst,( or at least hopt to) stand vpon prowd termes with London. And this( thou beloued of all men) is the very pith and marrow of the best and latest Newes( except the vnmasking of certaine Treasons) that came with the Post from Winchester, where if thou hadst hirde a Chamber( as would to heauen thou hadst) thou wouldst neuer haue gone to any Barbers in London whilst thou hadst liude, but haue bin trimd only there, for they are the true shauers, they haue the right Neapolitan polling. To whose commendations, let me glew this piece more, that it is the most excellent place for dispatching of old suites in the world, for a number of riding suites( that had lyen long in lauander) were worne out there, only with seruing amongst the hot shots, that marcht there vp and downe: let Westminster therefore, Temple-bar, and Fleetestreete, drinke off this draught of Rosa solis, to fetch life into them againe, after their so often swounding, that those few Iurors that went thither( if any did goe thither) haue tane an oath neuer to sit at Winchester-Ordinary againe, if they can choose, but rather to breake their fasts in the old Abbey behinde Westminster, with Pudding-Pyes, and Furmenty. Deliuer Copies of these Newes( good Nobody) to none of thy acquaintance( as thou tenderst me) and thou shalt commaund any seruice at my hands: for I haue an intent to hire three or foure Ballad-makers, who I know will be glad for sixe pence and a dinner, to turne all this limping Prose into more perfectly-halting Verse, that it shall doe any true-borne Citizens heart good, to heare such doings sung to some filthie tune, and so farewell. Turne ouer a new leafe, and try if I handle the Plague in his right kind. Deuoted to none but thy selfe, Some-body. Newes from Graues-ende. TO Sicknes, and to Queazie Tymes, We drinke a health in wholesome Rymes, Phisicke we inuoke thy aide, Thou( that borne in heauen) art made A lackey to the meanest creature, Mother of health; thou nurse of nature, Equall friend to rich and poore, At whose hands, Kings can get no more, Than emptie Beggers; O thou wise In nothing but in Misteries! Thou that ha'st of earth the rule, Where( like an Academe, or Schoole) Thou readst deep Lectures to thy sonnes,( Mens Demi-gods) Phisitions; Who thereby learne the abstruse powers Of Hearbs, of Roots, of Plants, of Flowers, And suck from poysonous stinking weede Preseruatiues, mans life to feede. Thou nearest to a God,( for none Can worke it, but a God alone,) O graue Enchauntresse, deigne to breath Thy Spells into vs, and bequeath Thy sacred fires, that they may shine In quick and vertuall medicine, Arme vs to conuince this Foe, This King of dead men, conquering so; This hungry Plague, Cater to death, Who eates vp all, yet famisheth: Teach vs how we may repaire These Ruines of the rotten Aire, Or, if the Aires pollution can So mortall strike through beast and man, Or, if in blood corrupt, Death lye, Or if one dead, cause others die, How ere, thy soueraigne cures disperse, And with that glory crowne our verse: That we may yet saue many a soule( Perchance now merry at his Bowle) That ere our Tragick Song be don, Must drinke this thick Contagion: But( ô griefe) why do we atcite The charmes of Phisick? whose numbd sprite Now quakes, and nothing dare, or can, Checkt by a more dread Magitian? Sick is Phisicks selfe to see Her Aphorismes prou'de a mockery: For whilst shee 's turning o're her bookes, And on her drugs and simples lookes, Shee 's run through owne armed heart,( Th' infection flying aboue Art:) Come therefore thou the best of Nine,( Because the Saddest) euery line That drops from Sorrowes pen is due Only to thee, to Thee we sue: Thou Tragick Maid, whose Fury's spent In dismall, and most black O●tent. In Vprores, and in Fall of Kings, Thou of Empires change that sings, Of Dearths, of Warres, of Plagues, and laughes At Funeralls, and Epitaphes: Carowse thou to our thirstie soule A full draught from the Thespian bowle, That we may powre it out agen, And drinke, in nombers Iuice to men, Striking such horrors through their eares Their haire may vpright stand with feares, Till rich Heires meeting our strong verse May not shrinck back, before it pierce Their marble eye-balls, and there shead One drop( at least) for him that 's dead: To worke which wonder, we will write With Penns puld from that bird of night( The shriking Owle) our Inck wee le mix With teares of widowes,( black as Stix) The paper where our lynes shall meete, Shall be a folded winding sheete, And that the Scene may shew more full, The Standish is a dead mans scull. Inspire vs therefore how to tell The Horror of a Plague, the Hell. The cause of the Plague. NOr drops this venome, from that faire And christall bosome of the Aire, Whose ceaseles motion clarifies All vaporous stench, that vpward flies And with her vniuersall wings, Thick poisonous fumes abroad she flings, Till( like to Thunder) rudely tost, Their malice is( by spreading) lost. Yet must we graunt that from the veines Of Rottennes and Filth, that reignes, O're heapes of bodies, slaine in warre, From Carrion( that indangers farre) From standing Pooles, or from the wombes Of Vaults, of Muckhills, Graues, &amp; Tombes, From Boggs; from ranck and dampish Fenns, From Moorish breaths, and nasty Denns, The Sun drawes vp contagious Fumes, Which falling downe burst into Rhewmes, And thousand malladies beside, By which our blood growes putrified. Or, being by windes not swept from thence, They houer there in cloudes condense, Which suckt in by our spirits, there flies Swift poyson through our Arteries, And( not resisted) strait it choakes The heart, with those pestiferous smoakes. Thus Phisicke and Philosophy Do preach, and( with this) Salues apply: Which search, and vse with speede: but now This monster breeds not thus: For how( If this be prou'de) can any doubt But that the Ayre does( round about) In flakes of poyson drop on all, The Sore being spread so generall? Nor dare we so conclude: for then Fruites, Fishes, Fowle, nor Beasts, nor Men Should scape vnteinted, Grazing flocks Would feede vpon their graues: the Oxe Drop at the plough: the trauelling Horse Would for a Rider beare a Coarse: Th' ambitious Larke,( the Bird of state) Whose wings do sweep heauens pearled gate, As she descended( Then) would bring, Pestilent Newes vnder each wing: Then Riu●rs would drink poyson'd aire: Trees shed their green and curled haire: Fish swim to shore full of disease,( For Pestilence would Fin the seas:) And we should thinke their scaly barkes, Hauing small speckles, had the markes. No soule could moue: but sure there lyes Some vengeance more then in the skies: Nor( as a Taper, at whose beames Ten thousands lights fetch golden streames, And yet it selfe is burnt to death,) Can we belieue that one mans breath Infected, and being blowne from him, His poyson should to others swim: For then who breath'd vpon the first? Where did th'imbulked venome burst? Or how scapte those that did diuide The selfe-same bits with those that dide? Drunke of the selfe-same cups, and laie In Vlcerous beds, as close as they? Or, those, who euery houre,( like Crowes) Prey on dead carkasies: their nose Still smelling to a graue: their feete Still wrapt within a dead mans sheete! Yet( the sad execution don) Careles among their Canns they run, And there( in scorne of Death or Fate) Of the deceast they widely prate, Yet snore vntoucht, and next day rise To act in more new Tragedies: Or( like so many bullets flying) A thousand here and there being dying, Death's Text-bill clapt on euery dore, Crosses on sides, behinde, before, Yet the( i' th midst) stands fast: from whence Comes this? you le say from Prouidence. T is so, and that 's the common Spell, That leades our Ignorance,( blinde as hell) And serues but as excuse, to keepe The soule from search of things more deepe; No, no, this black and burning starre( Whose sulphurd drops, do scald so farre,) Does neither houer o're our heads, Nor lyes it in our bloods, nor beds: Nor is it stitcht to our attires, Nor like wilde balls of running fires Or thunderbolts, which where they light Do either bruise, or kill out-right; Yet by the violence of that Bound Leape off, and giues a second wound: But this fierce dragon( huge and fowle) Sucks virid poyson from our soule, Which being spit forth again, there raigns Showers of Blisters, and of Blaines, For euery man within him feedes A worme which this contagion breedes; Our heauenly parts are plaguy sick, And there such leaprous spotts do stick, That God in anger fills his hand With Vengeance, throwing it on the land; Sure t is some Capitall offence, Some high, high Treason doth incense Th' Eternall King, that thus we are Arraign'd at Death most dreadfull barre; Th'Inditement writ on Englands brest, When other Countries( better blest) Feele not the Iudges heauy doome Whose breath( like Lightning doth consume And( with a whip of Planets) scourges The Veines of mortalls, In whom Surges Of sinfull blood, Billowes of Lust Stir vp the powres to acts vniust. Whether they be Princes Errors, Or faults of Peeres, pull downe these Terrors, Or( because we may not erre,) Lets sift it in particuler, The Courtiers pride, lust, and excesse, The Church mans painted holinesse; The Lawyers grinding of the poore, The Souldiers staruing at the doore, Ragd, leane, and pale through want of blood, Sold cheape by him for Countries good. The Schollers enuy; Farmers curse, When heau'ns rich Threasurer doth disburse In bounteous heapes( to thankles men) His vniuersall Blessings: then This deluing Moale, for madness eates Euen his owne lungs, and strange oathes sweates, Because he cannot sell for pence, Deare yeares, in spite of Prouidence. Adde vnto these, the City sin( Brought by seuen deadly monsters in) Which doth all bowndes, and blushing scorne, Because t is in the Freedome borne, What Traines of Vice,( which euen Hell hates) But haue bold passage through her gates? Pride in Diet, Pride in Cloathing, Pride in Building, pure in nothing, And that she may not want disease She sailes for it beyond the Seas, With Antwerp will she drinke vp Rhene: With Paris act the bloodiest Scene: Or in pyed fashions passe her folly, Mocking at heauen yet looke most holy: Of Vsury shee 'll rob the Iewes, Of Luxury, Venetian Stewes, With Spaniards, shee 's an Indianist, With barbarous Turks a Sodomist. So low her Antique walls do stand, These sinnes leape o're euen with one hand: And Hee, that all in modest black, Whose Eye-ball strings shall sooner crack, Then seeme to note a tempting face, Measuring streets with a Doue-like pace, Vnder that oyly vizard weares, The poore mans sweat, and Orphans teares: Now whether these particular Fates, Or generall Moles( disfiguring States) Whether one sin alone, or whether This Maine Battalion ioynd together, Do dare these plagues; we cannot tell, But downe they beate all humane Spell: Or, it may be, Iehouah lookes But now vpon those Audit-Bookes Of 45. yeares husht account, For houres mispent,( whose summes surmount The price of ransomd Kings) and there Finding our grieuous debts, doth cleere And crosse them vnder his owne hand, Being paid with Liues, through all the land. For since his Maiden. Seruant 's gone, And his new Vizeroy fills the Throne, Heauen meanes to giue him( as his bride) A Nation new, and purified. Take breath a while our panting Muse, And to the world tell gladder newes, Than these of Burialls, striue a while, To make thy sullen nombers smile: Forget the names of Graues, and Ghosts, The sound of bells: the vnknowne coasts Of Deaths vast Kingdome: and saile o're With fresher winde to happier Shore. For now the maiden Ile hath got, A Roiall Husband,( heauenly Lott) Faire Scotland does faire England wed, And giues her for her maiden-head, A crowne of gold, wrought in a Ring, With which Shee 's maried to a King: Thou Beldame( whisperer of false Rumors) Fame; cast aside those Antique humors, Lift vp thy golden Tromp, and sound Euen from Tweedes vtmost christ all bownd, And from the bankes of Siluer Thames To the greene Ocean, that King Iames Had made an Iland,( that did stand Halfe sinking) now the firmest land: Carry thou this to Neptunes eare, That his shrill Tritons it may beare, So farre, vntill the Danish sound With repercussiue voice rebound, That Eccho's( doubling more and more) May reach the parched Indian shore, For t is heau'ns care so great a wonder, Should fly vpon the wings of Thunder. The Horror of the Plague. O Thou my Countrie, here mine eyes Are almost sunck in waues, that rise From the rough winde of Sighs, to see A spring that lately courted thee In pompous brauery, All thy Bowers Gilt by the Sunne, perfumde with flowers, Now like a loathsome Leaperlying, Her arbors withring, greene Trees dying, Her Reuells, and May-meriments, Turned all to Tragick dreeryments: And thou( the mother of my breath) Whose soft brest thousandes nourisheth, Alrar of Ioue, thou throne of Kings: Thou Fownt, where milke and hony springs, Europs Iewell; Englands Iem: Sister to great Ierusalem: Neptunes minion,( bout whose wast The Thames is like a girdle cast,) Thou that( but health canst nothing want, Empresse of Cities, Troynouant. When I thy lofty Towers behold,( Whose Pinnacles were tipt with gold Both when the Sun did set and rise So louely wert thou in his eies) Now like old Monuments forsaken, Or( like tall Pynes) by winter thaken; Or, seeing thee gorgeous as a bride Euen in the heigth of all thy pride Disrobd'e, disgracte; And when all Nations Made loue to thee in amorous passions, Now scornd of all the world alone, None seeke thee, nor must thou seeke none, But like a prisoner must be kept In thine owne walles, till thou hast wept Thine eyes out, to behold thy sweete Dead children heapt about thy feete: O Derrest! say how can we chuse But haue a sad and drooping Muse, When Coarses do so choake thy way That now thou lookst like Golgatha; But thus, The altring of a State Alteis our Bodies, and our Fate, For Princes death 's do euen bespeake Millions of liues; when Kingdomes breake, People dissolue, and( as with Thunder) Cities proud glories rent asunder. Witnes thy walls, whose stony armes But yesterday receiu'de whole swarmes Of frighted English: Lord and Lowne, Lawyer, and Client, Courtier, Clowne, All sorts did to thy buildings fly, As to the safest Sanctuary. And he that through thy gates might passe, His feares were lockt in Towers of brasse, Happie that man: now happier they That from thy reach get first away: As from a shipwrack, to some shore: As from a lost field, drownd in gore: As from high Turrets, whose Ioints faile: Or rather from, some loathsome Iaile: But note heau'ns Iustice, they by flying That would cozen Death, and saue a dying, How like to chaffe abroad th' are blowne, And( but for scorne) might walke vnknowne; Like to plumde Estridges they ride, Or like Sea-pageants, all in pride Of Tacklings, Flags, and swelling Sailes, Borne on the loftiest waues, that veiles His purple bonnet, and in dread Bowes downe his snowie curled head, So from th' infected citie fly These Swallowes in their Gallantry, Looking that wheresoe're they light, Gay Sommer,( like a Parasite) Should waite on them, and build'em bowers And crowne their nests with wreathed flowers, And Swaynes to welcome them should sing And daunce, as for their Whisson King: Feather of Pride, how art thou tost? How soone are all thy beauties lost? How casely golden hopes vn-winde? The russet boore, and leatherne hinde, That two daies since did sinck his knee, And( all vncouered) worshipt thee, Or being but poore, and meanely cloathed, Was either laught to scorne or loathed, Now thee he loathes, and laughes to scorne, And tho vpon thy back be worne, More Sattin than a kingdomes worth, He barrs his doore, and thrusts thee forth: And they whose pallat Land nor Seas, Whome fashions of no shape could please, Whome Princes haue( in ages past) For rich attires, and sumptuous wast, Neuer come neere: now sit they rownd And feede( like beggers) on the grownd, A field their bed, whose dankish Sheetes Is the greene grasse: And he that meetes The flatrings●?? Fortune, does but lie In some rude barne, or loathsome stie: Forsooke of all, floured, forlorne: Owne brother does owne brother scorne, The trembling Father is vndone, Being once but breath'd on by his sonne; Or, if in this sad pilgrimage The hand of vengeance fall in rage, So heauy vpon any'es head Striking the sinfull body dead. O shame to ages yet to come! Dishonor to all Christendome! In hallowed ground no heaped gold Can buy a graue; nor linnen sold To make( so farre is pittie fled) The last apparell for the dead: But as the fashion is for those Whose desperare handes the knot vnlose Of their owne liues, In some hye-way Or barren field, their bones they lay, Euen such his buriall is; And there Without the balme of any teare, Or pomp of Souldiers, But( ô griefe!) Dragd like a Traitor or some thiefe At horses tailes, hee 's rudely throwne, The coarse being stuck with flowers by none, No bells( the dead mans Confort) playing, Nor any holy Churchman saying A Funerall Dirge: But swift th' are gon, As from some noysome cation O desolate Citie! now thy wings( Whose shadowe hath bene lou'd by Kings) Should feele sick feathers on each side, Seeing thus thy sonnes( got in ther pride) And heate of plenty, In peace borne, To their owne Nation left a scorne: Each cowheards feares a Ghost him haunts, Seeing one of thine inhabitants, And does a Iew, or Turke prefer, Before that name of Londoner; Would this were all: But this black Curse Doing ill abroad, at home does worse, For in thy( now dispeopled) streetes, The dead with dead, so thickly meetes, As if some Prophets voice should say None shall be Citizens, but they. Whole housholds; and whole streets are stricken, The sick do die, the sound do sicken, And Lord haue mercy vpon vs, crying Ere Mercy can come forth, th' are dying. No musick now is heard but bells, And all their tunes are sick mens knells; And euery stroake the bell does toll, Vp to heauen it windes a soule: Oh, if for euery coarse that 's laide In his cold bed of earth, were made A chyme of belles, if peales should ring For euery one whom death doth sting, Men should be deaffe, as those that dwell By Nylus fall; But now one Knell, Giues with his Iron voyce this doome, That twentie shall but haue one roome; There friend, and foe, the yong and old, The freezing coward, and the bold: Seruant, and maister: Fowle and faire: One Liuery weare, and fellowes are Sailing along in this black fleete, And at the New Graues-end do meete, Where Church-yards banquet with cold cheere, Holding a feast once in ten yeere, To which comes many a Pilgrym worme, Hungry and faint, beat with the storme Of galping Famine, which before Onely pickt bones, and had no more, But now their messes come so fast, They know not where, or which to tast; For before( Dust to Dust) be spoken, And throwne on One, more Graues be broken. Thou Iealous man I pittie thee, Thou that liu'st in hell to see A wantons eye cheapening the sleeke Soft Iewels, of thy faire wiues cheeke, My verse must run through thy cold heart, Thy wife has playd the womans part And lyen with Death: but( spite on spite) Thou must endure this very night Close by her side the poorest Groome, In selfe-same bed, and selfe-same roome: But ease thy vext soule, thus behold There 's one, who in the morne with gold Could haue built Castells: now hee 's made A pillow to a wretch, that prayde For halfe-penny Almes,( with broken lim) The Begger now is aboue him; So he that yesterday was clad In purple robes, and hourely had Euen at his fingers becke, the fees Of bared heads, and bending knees, Rich mens fawnings, poore mens praiers( Tho they were but hollow aires) Troopes of seruants at his calling, Children( like to subiects) falling At his proude feete: loe,( now hee 's taken By death,) he lies of all forsaken. These are the Tragedies, whose sight With teares blot all the lynes we write, The Stage whereon the Scenes are plaide Is a whole Kingdome: who was made By some( most prouident and wise) To hide from sad Spectators eyes Acts full of Ruth, a priuate Roome To drowne the horror of deaths doome, That building now no higher reare The Pest-House standeth euery where, For those that on their Beeres are borne, Are nombred more, than those that mourne. But you graue Patriots, whom Fate Makes Rulers of this walled State, We must not loose you in our verse, Whose Acts we one day may rehearse In marble nombers, that shall stand Aboue Tymes all-destroying hand: Only( methinkes) you do erre In flying from your charge so farre. So coward Captaines shrinke away, So Shepheards do their flocks betray: So Souldiers, and so Lambes do perish, So you kill those, y' are bound to cherish: Be therefore valiant, as y' are wife, Come back again: The man that dies Within your walls, is euen as neere To heau'n, as dying any where; But if( ô pardon our bold thought) You feare your breath is sooner caught Here then aloofe; and therefore keepe Out of Deaths reach, whilst thousands weepe And wring their hands for thousands dying, No comfort neare the sick man lying: T is to be fear'd( you petty-kings,) When back you spread your golden wings, A deadlyer siege( which heauen auert) Will your replenisht walls ingirt. T is now the Beggers plague, for none Are in this Battaile ouerthrowne But Babes and poore: The lesser Fly Now in this Spiders web doth lie. But if that great, and goodly swarme( That has broke through, and felt no harme,) In his inuenom'd snares should fall, O pittie! t were most tragicall: For then the Vsurer must behold His pestilent flesh, whislt all his gold Turns into Tokens, and the chest( They lie in,) his infections brest: How well hee le play the Misers part When all his coyne sticks at his heart? Hee s worth so many farthings then, That was a golden God mongst men. And t is the aptest death( so please Him that breath heauen, earth, and Seas) For euery couetous rooting Mowle That heaues his drosse aboue his soule, And doth in coyne all hopes repose To die with corps, stampt full of those. Then the rich Glutton, whose swolne eyne Looke fiery red( being boild in wine) And in his meales, adores the cup,( For when he falls downe that stands vp Therefore a goblet is his Saint, To whome he kneeles with small constrain:, When his owne goblet Scull flowes o're He worships Bacchus on all foure, For none's his God but Bacchus then, Who rules and guides all drunken men,) When He shall wake from wine, and view More then Tauern-tokens, new Stampt vpon his brest and armes, In horrid throngs, and purple swarmes, Then will he loath his former shapes, When he shall see blew markes mock grapes, And hang on clusters on each veine, Like to wine-bubbles, or the graine Of staggering sinne, which now appeares In the December of his yeares, His last of howers; when hee le scarce haue Time to goe sober to his Graue. And then to die!( dreadfull to thinke!) When all his blood is turnd to drinke: And who knowes not this Sentence giuen, Mongst all sinnes, none can reele to Heauen? But woe to him that sinkes in wine, And dyes so( without heau'd vp eyne) And buried so! O loathsome trench! His graue is like a Tauerne bench. T is fearefull, and most hard to say, How he shall stand at latter day. The adulterous and luxurious spirit Pawnd to hell, and sinnes hot merrit, That bathes in lust his leaprous soule, Acting a deed without controll Or thought of Deitie: through whose bloud, Runnes part of the Infernall floud: How will he freeze with horror? lying In dreadfull trance before his dying: The heate of all his dambd desires Coold with the thought of gnashing fires: His Ryots rauisht, all his pleasures His marrow wasted with his treasures, His painted harlots( whose imbraces Cost him many siluer faces, Whose only care and thought was then To keepe them sure from other men) Now they dance in Russians handes, Lazy Leiftenents( without bandes,) With muffled halfe-fac'de Pandars, laughing, Whilst he lies gasping, they sit qua●fing, Smile at this plague, and black mischance, Knowing their deaths come o're from France: T is not their season now to die, Two gnawing poisons cannot lie, In one corrupted flesh together, Nor can this poison then fly thether: There 's not a Strompet mongst them all That liues and rises by the fall, Dreads this contagion, or her threats, Being guarded with French Amulets. Yet all this while thy selfe liest panting, Thy Luxurious howers recanting, Whilst before thy face appeares, Th' adulterous fruit of all thy yeares In their true forme and horrid shapes, So many Incests, violent Rapes, Chambered adulteries, vncleane passions, Wanton habits, riotous fashions, And all these Anticks drest in hell, To dance about the passing bell; And clip thee round about the bed, Whilst thousand Horrors graspe thy head. The Cure of the Plagne. ANd therefore this infectious season That now arrests the Flesh for Treason Against heauens euerlasting King, Annointed with th' eternall spring( Of life and power) this stroke of Force, That turnes the world into a Coarse, Feeding the Dust with what it craues, Emptying whole houses to fill graues, These speckled Plagues( which our sinnes leuy) Are as needfull as th' are heauy; Whose cures to cite, our Muse for beares, Tho he the Daphnean wreath that weares( Being both Poesis Soueraigne King, And God of medicine) bids vs sing As boldly of those pollicies, Those Onfets, and those Batteries, By Phisick cunningly applied, To beate downe Plagues( so fortified) And of those Armes defensitiue, To keep th' assaulted Heart aliue, And of those wardes, and of those sleights, Vsde in these mortall single fights, As of the causes that commence This ciuill warre of Pestilence, For Poets soules should be confinde Within no bownds, their towring mindes Must( like the Sun) a progresse make Through Arts immensiue Zodiake: And suck( like Bees) the vertuous power, That flows in learnings seuen-sold flower, Distilling forth the same agen In sweet and wholesome Iuice to men: But for we see the Army great Of those whose charge it is to beat This proud Inuader, and haue skill In all those weapons, that do kill Such pestilent foes, we yeeld to them The glory of that stratagem: To whose Oraculous voice repaire, For they those Delphick Prophets are, That teach dead bodies to respire By sacred Aesculapian fire: We meane not those pied Lunatickes, Those bold fantastick Empirickes, Quack-saluers, mishrump Mountebancks, That in one night grow vp in rancks And liue by pecking Phisickes crummes, O hate these venemous broodes, there comes Worse sores from them, and more strange births Then from ten plagues, or twentie deaths: Only this Antidote apply, Cease vexing heauen, and cease to die. Seeke therefore( after you haue found Salue naturall for the naturall wound Of this Contagion,) Cure from thence Where first the euill did commence, And that 's the Soule: each one purge one, And Englands free, the Plague is gone. The necessitie of a Plague. YEt to mixe comfortable words Tho this be horrid, it affords Sober gladnes, and wise ioyes, Since desperate mixtures it destroies; For if our thoughts sit truly trying, The iust necessitie of dying How needfull( tho how dreadfull) are Purple Plagues, or Crimson warre, We would conclude( still vrging pittie) A Plague's the Purge to clense a Cittie: Who amongst millions can deny( In rought prose, or smooth Poesie) Of Euils, t is the lighter broode, A dearth of people, then of foode! And who knowes not, our Land ran o're With people; and was onely poore In hauing too too many, liuing, And wanting liuing! rather giuing Themselues to wast, deface and spoyle, Than to increase( by vertuous toyle) The banckrout bosome of our Realme Which naked birthes did ouerwhelme: This begers famine, and bleake dearth: When fruites of wombes passe fruites of earth, Then Famines onely Phisick: and The medcine for a ryotous Land Is such a plague: So it may please Mercies Distributer to appease, His speckled anger, and now hide Th' old rod of Plagues: no more to chide And lash our shoulders and sick vaines With Carbuncles, and shooting Blaines: Make vs the happiest amongst men, Immortall by our prophecing pen, That this last lyne may truly raigne, The Plague's ceast, heauen is friends againe. FINIS. A pos 〈…〉 ad Ciui 〈…〉 tem. Pest-ho 〈…〉 The 〈…〉